 (2) Where the Judge frames any charge under clause (b) of sub-section (1), the
 charge shall be read and explained to the accused present either physically or through
 electronic means and the accused shall be asked whether he pleads guilty of the offence
 charged or claims to be tried.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 252. If the accused pleads guilty, the Judge shall record the plea and may, in his
 discretion, convict him thereon.
 253. If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead, or claims to be tried or is not
 convicted under section 252, the Judge shall fix a date for the examination of witnesses, and
 may, on the application of the prosecution, issue any process for compelling the attendance
 of any witness or the production of any document or other thing.
 254. (1) On the date so fixed, the Judge shall proceed to take all such evidence as may
 be produced in support of the prosecution:
 Provided that evidence of a witness under this sub-section may be recorded by
 audio-video electronic means.
 (2) The deposition of evidence of any police officer or public servant may be taken
 through audio-video electronic means.
 (3) The Judge may, in his discretion, permit the cross-examination of any witness to
 be deferred until any other witness or witnesses have been examined or recall any witness
 for further cross-examination.
 255. If, after taking the evidence for the prosecution, examining the accused and
 hearing the prosecution and the defence on the point, the Judge considers that there is no
 evidence that the accused committed the offence, the Judge shall record an order of acquittal.
 256. (1) Where the accused is not acquitted under section 255, he shall be called
 upon to enter on his defence and adduce any evidence he may have in support thereof.
 (2) If the accused puts in any written statement, the Judge shall file it with the record.
 (3) If the accused applies for the issue of any process for compelling the attendance
 of any witness or the production of any document or thing, the Judge shall issue such
 process unless he considers, for reasons to be recorded, that such application should be
 refused on the ground that it is made for the purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating
 the ends of justice.
 257. When the examination of the witnesses (if any) for the defence is complete, the
 prosecutor shall sum up his case and the accused or his pleader shall be entitled to reply:
 Provided that where any point of law is raised by the accused or his pleader, the
 prosecution may, with the permission of the Judge, make his submissions with regard to
 such point of law.
 258. (1) After hearing arguments and points of law (if any), the Judge shall give a
 judgment in the case, as soon as possible, within a period of thirty days from the date of
 completion of arguments, which may for specific reasons extend to a period of sixty days.
 (2) If the accused is convicted, the Judge shall, unless he proceeds in accordance
 with the provisions of section 401, hear the accused on the questions of sentence, and then
 pass sentence on him according to law.
 259. In a case where a previous conviction is charged under the provisions of
 sub-section (7) of section 234, and the accused does not admit that he has been previously
 convicted as alleged in the charge, the Judge may, after he has convicted the said accused
 under section 252 or section 258, take evidence in respect of the alleged previous conviction,
 and shall record a finding thereon:
 Conviction on
 plea of guilty.
 Date for
 prosecution
 evidence.
 Evidence for
 prosecution.
 Acquittal.
 Entering upon
 defence.
 Arguments.
 Judgment of
 acquittal or
 conviction.
 Previous
 conviction.
84
 Provided that no such charge shall be read out by the Judge nor shall the accused be
 asked to plead thereto nor shall the previous conviction be referred to by the prosecution
 or in any evidence adduced by it, unless and until the accused has been convicted under
 section 252 or section 258.
 Procedure in
 cases
 instituted
 under sub
section (1) of
 Section 223.
 Compliance
 with section
 231.
 When accused
 shall be
 discharged.
 260. (1) A Court of Session taking cognizance of an offence under sub-section (1) of
 section 222 shall try the case in accordance with the procedure for the trial of warrant-cases
 instituted otherwise than on a police report before a Court of Magistrate:
 Provided that the person against whom the offence is alleged to have been committed
 shall, unless the Court of Session, for reasons to be recorded, otherwise directs, be examined
 as a witness for the prosecution.
 (2) Every trial under this section shall be held in camera  if either party thereto so
 desires or if the Court thinks fit so to do.
 (3) If, in any such case, the Court discharges or acquits all or any of the accused and
 is of opinion that there was no reasonable cause for making the accusation against them or
 any of them, it may, by its order of discharge or acquittal, direct the person against whom
 the offence was alleged to have been committed (other than the President, Vice-President or
 the Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory) to show cause why he
 should not pay compensation to such accused or to each or any of such accused, when
 there are more than one.
 (4) The Court shall record and consider any cause which may be shown by the person
 so directed, and if it is satisfied that there was no reasonable cause for making the accusation,
 it may, for reasons to be recorded, make an order that compensation to such amount not
 exceeding five thousand rupees, as it may determine, be paid by such person to the accused
 or to each or any of them.
 (5) Compensation awarded under sub-section (4) shall be recovered as if it were a fine
 imposed by a Magistrate.
 (6) No person who has been directed to pay compensation under sub-section (4)
 shall, by reason of such order, be exempted from any civil or criminal liability in respect of
 the complaint made under this section:
 Provided that any amount paid to an accused person under this section shall be taken
 into account in awarding compensation to such person in any subsequent civil suit relating
 to the same matter.
 (7) The person who has been ordered under sub-section (4) to pay compensation
 may appeal from the order, in so far as it relates to the payment of compensation, to the High
 Court.
 (8) When an order for payment of compensation to an accused person is made, the
 compensation shall not be paid to him before the period allowed for the presentation of the
 appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal is presented, before the appeal has been decided.
 CHAPTER XXI
 TRIAL OF WARRANT-CASES BY MAGISTRATES
 A.—Cases instituted on a police report
 261. When, in any warrant-case instituted on a police report, the accused appears or
 is brought before a Judicial Magistrate at the commencement of the trial, the Judicial
 Magistrate shall satisfy himself that he has complied with the provisions of section 230.
 262. (1) The accused may prefer an application for discharge within a period of sixty
 days from the date of framing of charges.
 (2) If, upon considering the police report and the documents sent with it under
 section 293 and making such examination, if any, of the accused as the Magistrate thinks
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
85
 necessary and after giving the prosecution and the accused an opportunity of being heard,
 the Magistrate considers the charge against the accused to be groundless, he shall discharge
 the accused, and record his reasons for so doing.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 263. (1) If, upon such consideration, examination, if any, and hearing, the Magistrate
 is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence
 triable under this Chapter, which such Magistrate is competent to try and which, in his
 opinion, could be adequately punished by him, he shall frame in writing a charge against the
 accused within a period of sixty days from the date of first hearing on charge.
 (2) The charge shall then be read and explained to the accused, and he shall be asked
 whether he pleads guilty of the offence charged or claims to be tried.
 264. If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea and may, in his
 discretion, convict him thereon.
 265. (1) If the accused refuses to plead or does not plead, or claims to be tried or the
 Magistrate does not convict the accused under section 264, the Magistrate shall fix a date
 for the examination of witnesses:
 Provided that the Magistrate shall supply in advance to the accused, the statement of
 witnesses recorded during investigation by the police.
 (2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution, issue a summons to
 any of its witnesses directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing.
 (3) On the date so fixed, the Magistrate shall proceed to take all such evidence as may
 be produced in support of the prosecution:
 Provided that the Magistrate may permit the cross-examination of any witness to be
 deferred until any other witness or witnesses have been examined or recall any witness for
 further cross-examination:
 Provided further that evidence of a witness under this sub-section may be recorded
 by audio-video electronic means.
 266. (1) The accused shall then be called upon to enter upon his defence and produce
 his evidence; and if the accused puts in any written statement, the Magistrate shall file it
 with the record.
 (2) If the accused, after he has entered upon his defence, applies to the Magistrate to
 issue any process for compelling the attendance of any witness for the purpose of examination
 or cross-examination, or the production of any document or other thing, the Magistrate
 shall issue such process unless he considers that such application should be refused on
 the ground that it is made for the purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of
 justice and such ground shall be recorded by him in writing:
 Provided that when the accused has cross-examined or had the opportunity of
 cross-examining any witness before entering on his defence, the attendance of such witness
 shall not be compelled under this section, unless the Magistrate is satisfied that it is
 necessary for the ends of justice.
 (3) The Magistrate may, before summoning any witness on an application under
 sub-section (2), require that the reasonable expenses incurred by the witness in attending
 for the purposes of the trial be deposited in Court.
 B.—Cases instituted otherwise than on police report
 267. (1) When, in any warrant-case instituted otherwise than on a police report, the
 accused appears or is brought before a Magistrate, the Magistrate shall proceed to hear the
 prosecution and take all such evidence as may be produced in support of the prosecution.
 (2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution, issue a summons to
 any of its witnesses directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing.
 Framing of
 charge.
 Conviction on
 plea of guilty.
 Evidence for
 prosecution.
 Evidence for
 defence.
 Evidence for
 prosecution.
86
 When accused
 shall be
 discharged.
 Procedure
 where accused
 is not
 discharged.
 Evidence for
 defence.
 Acquittal or
 conviction.
 268. (1) If, upon taking all the evidence referred to in section 267, the Magistrate
 considers, for reasons to be recorded, that no case against the accused has been made out
 which, if unrebutted, would warrant his conviction, the Magistrate shall discharge him.
 (2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a Magistrate from discharging
 the accused at any previous stage of the case if, for reasons to be recorded by such
 Magistrate, he considers the charge to be groundless.
 269. (1) If, when such evidence has been taken, or at any previous stage of the case,
 the Magistrate is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has
 committed an offence triable under this Chapter, which such Magistrate is competent to try
 and which, in his opinion, could be adequately punished by him, he shall frame in writing a
 charge against the accused.
 (2) The charge shall then be read and explained to the accused, and he shall be asked
 whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to make.
 (3) If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea, and may, in his
 discretion, convict him thereon.
 (4) If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead or claims to be tried or if the
 accused is not convicted under sub-section (3), he shall be required to state, at the
 commencement of the next hearing of the case, or, if the Magistrate for reasons to be
 recorded in writing so thinks fit, forthwith, whether he wishes to cross-examine any, and, if
 so, which, of the witnesses for the prosecution whose evidence has been taken.
 (5) If he says he does so wish, the witnesses named by him shall be recalled and, after
 cross-examination and re-examination (if any), they shall be discharged.
 (6) The evidence of any remaining witnesses for the prosecution shall next be taken,
 and after cross-examination and re-examination (if any), they shall also be discharged.
 (7) Where, despite giving opportunity to the prosecution and after taking all reasonable
 measures under this Sanhita, if the attendance of the prosecution witnesses under
 sub-sections (5) and (6) cannot be secured for cross examination, it shall be deemed that
 such witness has not been examined for not being available, and the Magistrate may close
 the prosecution evidence for reasons to be recorded in writing and proceed with the case
 on the basis of the materials on record.
 270. The accused shall then be called upon to enter upon his defence and produce
 his evidence; and the provisions of section 266 shall apply to the case.
 C.—Conclusion of trial
 271. (1) If, in any case under this Chapter in which a charge has been framed, the
 Magistrate finds the accused not guilty, he shall record an order of acquittal.
 (2) Where, in any case under this Chapter, the Magistrate finds the accused guilty,
 but does not proceed in accordance with the provisions of section 364 or section 401, he
 shall, after hearing the accused on the question of sentence, pass sentence upon him
 according to law.
 (3) Where, in any case under this Chapter, a previous conviction is charged under the
 provisions of sub-section (7) of section 234 and the accused does not admit that he has
 been previously convicted as alleged in the charge, the Magistrate may, after he has convicted
 the said accused, take evidence in respect of the alleged previous conviction, and shall
 record a finding thereon:
 Provided that no such charge shall be read out by the Magistrate nor shall the
 accused be asked to plead thereto nor shall the previous conviction be referred to by the
 prosecution or in any evidence adduced by it, unless and until the accused has been
 convicted under sub-section (2).
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
87
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 272. When the proceedings have been instituted upon complaint, and on any day
 fixed for the hearing of the case, the complainant is absent, and the offence may be lawfully
 compounded or is not a cognizable offence, the Magistrate may after giving thirty days'
 time to the complainant to be present, in his discretion, notwithstanding anything
 hereinbefore contained, at any time before the charge has been framed, discharge the
 accused.
 273. (1) If, in any case instituted upon complaint or upon information given to a
 police officer or to a Magistrate, one or more persons is or are accused before a Magistrate
 of any offence triable by a Magistrate, and the Magistrate by whom the case is heard
 discharges or acquits all or any of the accused, and is of opinion that there was no reasonable
 ground for making the accusation against them or any of them, the Magistrate may, by his
 order of discharge or acquittal, if the person upon whose complaint or information the
 accusation was made is present, call upon him forthwith to show cause why he should not
 pay compensation to such accused or to each or any of such accused when there are more
 than one; or, if such person is not present, direct the issue of a summons to him to appear
 and show cause as aforesaid.
 (2) The Magistrate shall record and consider any cause which such complainant or
 informant may show, and if he is satisfied that there was no reasonable ground for making
 the accusation, may, for reasons to be recorded, make an order that compensation to such
 amount, not exceeding the amount of fine he is empowered to impose, as he may determine,
 be paid by such complainant or informant to the accused or to each or any of them.
 (3) The Magistrate may, by the order directing payment of the compensation under
 sub-section (2), further order that, in default of payment, the person ordered to pay such
 compensation shall undergo simple imprisonment for a period not exceeding thirty days.
 (4) When any person is imprisoned under sub-section (3), the provisions of
 sections 68 and 69 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall, so far as may be, apply.
 (5) No person who has been directed to pay compensation under this section shall,
 by reason of such order, be exempted from any civil or criminal liability in respect of the
 complaint made or information given by him:
 Provided that any amount paid to an accused person under this section shall be taken
 into account in awarding compensation to such person in any subsequent civil suit relating
 to the same matter.
 (6) A complainant or informant who has been ordered under sub-section (2) by a
 Magistrate of the second class to pay compensation exceeding one thousand rupees, may
 appeal from the order, as if such complainant or informant had been convicted on a trial held
 by such Magistrate.
 (7) When an order for payment of compensation to an accused person is made in a
 case which is subject to appeal under sub-section (6), the compensation shall not be paid to
 him before the period allowed for the presentation of the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal
 is presented, before the appeal has been decided; and where such order is made in a case
 which is not so subject to appeal the compensation shall not be paid before the expiration
 of one month from the date of the order.
 (8) The provisions of this section apply to summons-cases as well as to
 warrant-cases.
 CHAPTER XXII
 TRIAL OF SUMMONS-CASES BY MAGISTRATES
 274. When in a summons-case the accused appears or is brought before the
 Magistrate, the particulars of the offence of which he is accused shall be stated to him, and
 he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to make, but it shall not be
 necessary to frame a formal charge:
 Absence of
 complainant.
 Compensation
 for accusation
 without
 reasonable
 cause.
 Substance of
 accusation to
 be stated.
88
 Provided that if the Magistrate considers the accusation as groundless, he shall, after
 recording reasons in writing, release the accused and such release shall have the effect of
 discharge.
 Conviction on
 plea of guilty.
 Conviction on
 plea of guilty
 in absence of
 accused in
 petty cases.
 Procedure
 when not
 convicted.
 Acquittal or
 conviction.
 Non-appearance
 or death of
 complainant.
 Withdrawal of
 complaint.
 275. If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea as nearly as
 possible in the words used by the accused and may, in his discretion, convict him thereon.
 276. (1) Where a summons has been issued under section 229 and the accused
 desires to plead guilty to the charge without appearing before the Magistrate, he shall
 transmit to the Magistrate, by post or by messenger, a letter containing his plea and also the
 amount of fine specified in the summons.
 (2) The Magistrate may, in his discretion, convict the accused in his absence, on his
 plea of guilty and sentence him to pay the fine specified in the summons, and the amount
 transmitted by the accused shall be adjusted towards that fine, or where a pleader authorised
 by the accused in this behalf pleads guilty on behalf of the accused, the Magistrate shall
 record the plea as nearly as possible in the words used by the pleader and may, in his
 discretion, convict the accused on such plea and sentence him as aforesaid.
 277. (1) If the Magistrate does not convict the accused under section 275 or
 section 276, the Magistrate shall proceed to hear the prosecution and take all such evidence
 as may be produced in support of the prosecution, and also to hear the accused and take all
 such evidence as he produces in his defence.
 (2) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, on the application of the prosecution or the
 accused, issue a summons to any witness directing him to attend or to produce any document
 or other thing.
 (3) The Magistrate may, before summoning any witness on such application, require
 that the reasonable expenses of the witness incurred in attending for the purposes of the
 trial be deposited in Court.
 278. (1) If the Magistrate, upon taking the evidence referred to in section 277 and
 such further evidence, if any, as he may, of his own motion, cause to be produced, finds the
 accused not guilty, he shall record an order of acquittal.
 (2) Where the Magistrate does not proceed in accordance with the provisions of
 section 364 or section 401, he shall, if he finds the accused guilty, pass sentence upon him
 according to law.
 (3) A Magistrate may, under section 275 or section 278, convict the accused of any
 offence triable under this Chapter, which from the facts admitted or proved he appears to
 have committed, whatever may be the nature of the complaint or summons, if the Magistrate
 is satisfied that the accused would not be prejudiced thereby.
 279. (1) If the summons has been issued on complaint, and on the day appointed for
 the appearance of the accused, or any day subsequent thereto to which the hearing may be
 adjourned, the complainant does not appear, the Magistrate shall, notwithstanding anything
 hereinbefore contained, acquit the accused, unless for some reason he thinks it proper to
 adjourn the hearing of the case to some other day:
 Provided that where the complainant is represented by a pleader or by the officer
 conducting the prosecution or where the Magistrate is of opinion that the personal
 attendance of the complainant is not necessary, the Magistrate may, dispense with his
 attendance and proceed with the case.
 (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall, so far as may be, apply also to cases
 where the non-appearance of the complainant is due to his death.
 280. If a complainant, at any time before a final order is passed in any case under this
 Chapter, satisfies the Magistrate that there are sufficient grounds for permitting him to
 withdraw his complaint against the accused, or if there be more than one accused, against
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
89
 all or any of them, the Magistrate may permit him to withdraw the same, and shall thereupon
 acquit the accused against whom the complaint is so withdrawn.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 1 of 1871.
 40
 45
 281. In any summons-case instituted otherwise than upon complaint, a Magistrate of
 the first class or, with the previous sanction of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, any other
 Judicial Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded by him, stop the proceedings at any
 stage without pronouncing any judgment and where such stoppage of proceedings is made
 after the evidence of the principal witnesses has been recorded, pronounce a judgment of
 acquittal, and in any other case, release the accused, and such release shall have the effect
 of discharge.
 282. When in the course of the trial of a summons-case relating to an offence punishable
 with imprisonment for a term exceeding six months, it appears to the Magistrate that in the
 interests of justice, the offence should be tried in accordance with the procedure for the trial
 of warrant-cases, such Magistrate may proceed to re-hear the case in the manner provided
 by this Sanhita for the trial of warrant-cases and may re-call any witness who may have
 been examined.
 CHAPTER XXIII
 SUMMARY TRIALS
 283. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Sanhita—
 (a) any Chief Judicial Magistrate;
 (b) Magistrate of the first class,
 shall try in a summary way all or any of the following offences:—
 (i) theft, under section 301, section 303 or section 304 of the Bharatiya
 Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 where the value of the property stolen does not exceed
 twenty thousand rupees;
 (ii) receiving or retaining stolen property, under section 315 of the
 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, where the value of the property does not exceed
 twenty thousand rupees;
 (iii) assisting in the concealment or disposal of stolen property under
 section 315 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, where the value of such
 property does not exceed twenty thousand rupees;
 (iv) offences under section 330 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
 (v) insult with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, under section 350,
 and criminal intimidation, under section 349 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,
 2023;
 (vi) abetment of any of the foregoing offences;
 (vii) an attempt to commit any of the foregoing offences, when such
 attempt is an offence;
 (viii) any offence constituted by an act in respect of which a complaint
 may be made under section 20 of the Cattle-trespass Act, 1871.
 (2) The Magistrate may, after giving the accused a reasonable opportunity of being
 heard, for reasons to be recorded in writing, try in a summary way all or any of the offences
 not punishable with death or imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding
 three years.
 (3) When, in the course of a summary trial it appears to the Magistrate that the nature
 of the case is such that it is undesirable to try it summarily, the Magistrate shall re-call any
 witnesses who may have been examined and proceed to re-hear the case in the manner
 provided by this Sanhita.
 Power to stop
 proceedings in
 certain cases.
 Power of
 Court to
 convert
 summons
cases into
 warrant-cases.
 Power to try
 summarily.
90
 Summary trial
 by Magistrate
 of second
 class.
 Procedure for
 summary
 trials.
 Record in
 summary
 trials.
 Judgement in
 cases tried
 summarily.
 Language of
 record and
 judgment.
 Application of
 Chapter.
 284. The High Court may confer on any Magistrate invested with the powers of a
 Magistrate of the second class power to try summarily any offence which is punishable
 only with fine or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months with or without fine,
 and any abetment of or attempt to commit any such offence.
 285. (1) In trials under this Chapter, the procedure specified in this Sanhita for the trial
 of summons-case shall be followed except as hereinafter mentioned.
 (2) No sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding three months shall be passed in
 the case of any conviction under this Chapter.
 286. In every case tried summarily, the Magistrate shall enter, in such form as the
 State Government may direct, the following particulars, namely:—
 (a) the serial number of the case;
 (b) the date of the commission of the offence;
 (c) the date of the report or complaint;
 (d) the name of the complainant (if any);
 (e) the name, parentage and residence of the accused;
 (f) the offence complained of and the offence (if any) proved, and in cases
 coming under clause (ii), clause (iii) or clause (iv) of sub-section (1) of section 283,
 the value of the property in respect of which the offence has been committed;
 (g) the plea of the accused and his examination (if any);
 (h) the finding;
 (i) the sentence or other final order;
 (j) the date on which proceedings terminated.
 287. In every case tried summarily in which the accused does not plead guilty, the
 Magistrate shall record the substance of the evidence and a judgment containing a brief
 statement of the reasons for the finding.
 288. (1) Every such record and judgment shall be written in the language of the Court.
 (2) The High Court may authorise any Magistrate empowered to try offences summarily
 to prepare the aforesaid record or judgment or both by means of an officer appointed in this
 behalf by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and the record or judgment so prepared shall be
 signed by such Magistrate.
 CHAPTER XXIV
 PLEA BARGAINING
 289. (1) This Chapter shall apply in respect of an accused against whom—
 (a) the report has been forwarded by the officer in charge of the police station
 under section 193 alleging therein that an offence appears to have been committed by
 him other than an offence for which the punishment of death or of imprisonment for
 life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years has been provided under the
 law for the time being in force; or
 (b) a Magistrate has taken cognizance of an offence on complaint, other than an
 offence for which the punishment of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment
 for a term exceeding seven years, has been provided under the law for the time being
 in force, and after examining complainant and witnesses under section 223, issued the
 process under section 227,
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
91
 but does not apply where such offence affects the socio-economic condition of the country
 or has been committed against a woman, or a child below the age of fourteen years.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, by notification,
 determine the offences under the law for the time being in force which shall be the offences
 affecting the socio-economic condition of the country.
 290. (1) A person accused of an offence may file an application for plea bargaining
 within a period of thirty days from the date of framing of charge in the Court in which such
 offence is pending for trial.
 (2) The application under sub-section (1) shall contain a brief description of the case
 relating to which the application is filed including the offence to which the case relates and
 shall be accompanied by an affidavit sworn by the accused stating therein that he has
 voluntarily preferred, after understanding the nature and extent of punishment provided
 under the law for the offence, the plea bargaining in his case and that he has not previously
 been convicted by a Court in a similar case.
 (3) After receiving the application under sub-section (1), the Court shall issue notice
 to the Public Prosecutor or the complainant of the case and to the accused to appear on the
 date fixed for the case.
 (4) When the Public Prosecutor or the complainant of the case and the accused
 appear on the date fixed under sub-section (3), the Court shall examine the accused in
 camera, where the other party in the case shall not be present, to satisfy itself that the
 accused has filed the application voluntarily and where—
 (a) the Court is satisfied that the application has been filed by the accused
 voluntarily, it shall provide time, not exceeding sixty days, to the Public Prosecutor or
 the complainant of the case and the accused to work out a mutually satisfactory
 disposition of the case which may include giving to the victim by the accused the
 compensation and other expenses during the case and thereafter fix the date for
 further hearing of the case;
 (b) the Court finds that the application has been filed involuntarily by the
 accused or he has previously been convicted by a Court in a case in which he had
 been charged with the same offence, it shall proceed further in accordance with the
 provisions of this Sanhita from the stage such application has been filed under
 sub-section (1).
 291. In working out a mutually satisfactory disposition under clause (a) of
 sub-section (4) of section 290, the Court shall follow the following procedure, namely:—
 (a) in a case instituted on a police report, the Court shall issue notice to the
 Public Prosecutor, the police officer who has investigated the case, the accused and
 the victim of the case to participate in the meeting to work out a satisfactory disposition
 of the case:
 Provided that throughout such process of working out a satisfactory disposition
 of the case, it shall be the duty of the Court to ensure that the entire process is
 completed voluntarily by the parties participating in the meeting:
 Provided further that the accused, if he so desires, participate in such meeting
 with his pleader, if any, engaged in the case;
 (b) in a case instituted otherwise than on police report, the Court shall issue
 notice to the accused and the victim of the case to participate in a meeting to work out
 a satisfactory disposition of the case:
 Provided that it shall be the duty of the Court to ensure, throughout such
 process of working out a satisfactory disposition of the case, that it is completed
 voluntarily by the parties participating in the meeting:
 Application
 for plea
 bargaining.
 Guidelines for
 mutually
 satisfactory
 disposition.
92
 Provided further that if the victim of the case or the accused so desires, he may
 participate in such meeting with his pleader engaged in the case.
 Report of
 mutually
 satisfactory
 disposition to
 be submitted
 before Court.
 Disposal of
 case.
 Judgment of
 Court.
 Finality of
 judgement.
 Power of
 Court in plea
 bargaining.
 Period of
 detention
 undergone by
 accused to be
 set off against
 sentence of
 imprisonment.
 Savings.
 292. Where in a meeting under section 291, a satisfactory disposition of the case has
 been worked out, the Court shall prepare a report of such disposition which shall be signed
 by the presiding officer of the Court and all other persons who participated in the meeting
 and if no such disposition has been worked out, the Court shall record such observation
 and proceed further in accordance with the provisions of this Sanhita from the stage the
 application under sub-section (1) of section 290 has been filed in such case.
 293. Where a satisfactory disposition of the case has been worked out under
 section 292, the Court shall dispose of the case in the following manner, namely:—
 (a) the Court shall award the compensation to the victim in accordance with the
 disposition under section 292 and hear the parties on the quantum of the punishment,
 releasing of the accused on probation of good conduct or after admonition under
 section 401 or for dealing with the accused under the provisions of the Probation of
 Offenders Act, 1958 or any other law for the time being in force and follow the procedure
 specified in the succeeding clauses for imposing the punishment on the accused;
 (b) after hearing the parties under clause (a), if the Court is of the view that
 section 401 or the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 or any other law
 for the time being in force are attracted in the case of the accused, it may release the
 accused on probation or provide the benefit of any such law;
 (c) after hearing the parties under clause (b), if the Court finds that minimum
 punishment has been provided under the law for the offence committed by the accused,
 it may sentence the accused to half of such minimum punishment, and where the
 accused is a first-time offender and has not been convicted of any offence in the past,
 it may sentence the accused to one-fourth of such minimum punishment;
 (d) in case after hearing the parties under clause (b), the Court finds that the
 offence committed by the accused is not covered under clause (b) or clause (c), then,
 it may sentence the accused to one-fourth of the punishment provided or extendable,
 as the case may be, for such offence and where the accused is a first-time offender
 and has not been convicted of any offence in the past, it may sentence the accused to
 one-sixth of the punishment provided or extendable, as the case may be, for such
 offence.
 294. The Court shall deliver its judgment in terms of section 293 in the open Court and
 the same shall be signed by the presiding officer of the Court.
 295. The judgment delivered by the Court under this section shall be final and no
 appeal (except the special leave petition under article 136 and writ petition under articles 226
 and 227 of the Constitution) shall lie in any Court against such judgment.
 296. A Court shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this
 Chapter, all the powers vested in respect of bail, trial of offences and other matters relating
 to the disposal of a case in such Court under this Sanhita.
 297. The provisions of section 469 shall apply, for setting off the period of detention
 undergone by the accused against the sentence of imprisonment imposed under this Chapter,
 in the same manner as they apply in respect of the imprisonment under other provisions of
 this Sanhita.
 298. The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything
 inconsistent therewith contained in any other provisions of this Sanhita and nothing in
 such other provisions shall be construed to constrain the meaning of any provision of this
 Chapter.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 20 of 1958.
 20 of 1958.
93
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression "Public Prosecutor"
 has the meaning assigned to it under clause (t) of section 2 and includes an Assistant Public
 Prosecutor appointed under section 19.
 5
 2 of 2016.
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 299. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the
 statements or facts stated by an accused in an application for plea bargaining filed under
 section 290 shall not be used for any other purpose except for the purpose of this Chapter.
 300. Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any juvenile or child as defined in section 2
 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
 CHAPTER XXV
 ATTENDANCE OF PERSONS CONFINED OR DETAINED IN PRISONS
 301. In this Chapter,—
 (a) "detained" includes detained under any law providing for preventive
 detention;
 (b) "prison" includes,—
 (i) any place which has been declared by the State Government, by general
 or special order, to be a subsidiary jail;
 (ii) any reformatory, Borstal institution or institution of a like nature.
 302. (1) Whenever, in the course of an inquiry, trial or proceeding under this Sanhita,
 it appears to a Criminal Court,—
 (a) that a person confined or detained in a prison should be brought before the
 Court for answering to a charge of an offence, or for the purpose of any proceedings
 against him; or
 (b) that it is necessary for the ends of justice to examine such person as a
 witness,
 the Court may make an order requiring the officer in charge of the prison to produce
 such person before the Court answering to the charge or for the purpose of such
 proceeding or for giving evidence.
 (2) Where an order under sub-section (1) is made by a Magistrate of the second class,
 it shall not be forwarded to, or acted upon by, the officer in charge of the prison unless it is
 countersigned by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, to whom such Magistrate is subordinate.
 (3) Every order submitted for countersigning under sub-section (2) shall be
 accompanied by a statement of the facts which, in the opinion of the Magistrate, render the
 order necessary, and the Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom it is submitted may, after
 considering such statement, decline to countersign the order.
 303. (1) The State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be, may, at
 any time, having regard to the matters specified in sub-section (2), by general or special
 order, direct that any person or class of persons shall not be removed from the prison in
 which he or they may be confined or detained, and thereupon, so long as the order remains
 in force, no order made under section 302, whether before or after the order of the State
 Government, shall have effect in respect of such person or class of persons.
 (2) Before making an order under sub-section (1), the State Government or the Central
 Government in the cases instituted by its central agency, as the case may be, shall have
 regard to the following matters, namely:—
 (a) the nature of the offence for which, or the grounds on which, the person or
 class of persons has been ordered to be confined or detained in prison;
 Statements of
 accused not to
 be used.
 Non
application of
 Chapter.
 Definitions.
 Power to
 require
 attendance of
 prisoners.
 Power of State
 Government
 or Central
 Government
 to exclude
 certain
 persons from
 operation of
 section 302
  (b) the likelihood of the disturbance of public order if the person or class of
 persons is allowed to be removed from the prison;
 (c) the public interest, generally.
 Officer in
 charge of
 prison to
 abstain from
 carrying out
 order in
 certain
 contingencies.
 Prisoner to be
 brought to
 Court in
 custody.
 Power to issue
 commission
 for
 examination
 of witness in
 prison.
 Language of
 Courts.
 Evidence to be
 taken in
 presence of
 accused.
 Record in
 summons
cases and
 inquiries.
 304. Where the person in respect of whom an order is made under section 302—
 (a) is by reason of sickness or infirmity unfit to be removed from the prison; or
 (b) is under committal for trial or under remand pending trial or pending a
 preliminary investigation; or
 (c) is in custody for a period which would expire before the expiration of the time
 required for complying with the order and for taking him back to the prison in which
 he is confined or detained; or
 (d) is a person to whom an order made by the State Government under
 section 303 applies,
 the officer in charge of the prison shall abstain from carrying out the Court's order and
 shall send to the Court a statement of reasons for so abstaining:
 Provided that where the attendance of such person is required for giving evidence at
 a place not more than twenty-five kilometres distance from the prison, the officer in charge
 of the prison shall not so abstain for the reason mentioned in clause (b).
 305. Subject to the provisions of section 304, the officer in charge of the prison shall,
 upon delivery of an order made under sub-section (1) of section 302 and duly countersigned,
 where necessary, under sub-section (2) thereof, cause the person named in the order to be
 taken to the Court in which his attendance is required, so as to be present there at the time
 mentioned in the order, and shall cause him to be kept in custody in or near the Court until
 he has been examined or until the Court authorises him to be taken back to the prison in
 which he was confined or detained.
 306. The provisions of this Chapter shall be without prejudice to the power of the
 Court to issue, under section 319, a commission for the examination, as a witness, of any
 person confined or detained in a prison; and the provisions of Part B of Chapter XXVI shall
 apply in relation to the examination on commission of any such person in the prison as they
 apply in relation to the examination on commission of any other person.
 CHAPTER XXVI
 EVIDENCE IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS
 A.—Mode of taking and recording evidence
 307. The State Government may determine what shall be, for purposes of this Sanhita,
 the language of each Court within the State other than the High Court.
 308. Except as otherwise expressly provided, all evidence taken in the course of the
 trial or other proceeding shall be taken in the presence of the accused, or, when his personal
 attendance is dispensed with, in the presence of his pleader:
 Provided that where the evidence of a woman below the age of eighteen years who is
 alleged to have been subjected to rape or any other sexual offence, is to be recorded, the
 court may take appropriate measures to ensure that such woman is not confronted by the
 accused while at the same time ensuring the right of cross-examination of the accused.
 Explanation.—In this section, "accused" includes a person in relation to whom any
 proceeding under Chapter IX has been commenced under this Sanhita.
 309. (1) In all summons-cases tried before a Magistrate, in all inquiries under sections
 165 to 168 (both inclusive), and in all proceedings under section 493 otherwise than in the
 course of a trial, the Magistrate shall, as the examination of each witness proceeds, make a
 memorandum of the substance of the evidence in the language of the Court:
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
95
 Provided that if the Magistrate is unable to make such memorandum himself, he shall,
 after recording the reason of his inability, cause such memorandum to be made in writing or
 from his dictation in open Court.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (2) Such memorandum shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part of the
 record.
 310. (1) In all warrant-cases tried before a Magistrate, the evidence of each witness
 shall, as his examination proceeds, be taken down in writing either by the Magistrate himself
 or by his dictation in open Court or, where he is unable to do so owing to a physical or other
 incapacity, under his direction and superintendence, by an officer of the Court appointed
 by him in this behalf:
 Provided that evidence of a witness under this sub-section may also be recorded by
 audio-video electronic means in the presence of the advocate of the person accused of the
 offence.
 (2) Where the Magistrate causes the evidence to be taken down, he shall record a
 certificate that the evidence could not be taken down by himself for the reasons referred to
 in sub-section (1).
 (3) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken down in the form of a narrative; but the
 Magistrate may, in his discretion take down, or cause to be taken down, any part of such
 evidence in the form of question and answer.
 (4) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part
 of the record.
 311. (1) In all trials before a Court of Session, the evidence of each witness shall, as
 his examination proceeds, be taken down in writing either by the presiding Judge himself or
 by his dictation in open Court, or under his direction and superintendence, by an officer of
 the Court appointed by him in this behalf.
 (2) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken down in the form of a narrative, but the
 presiding Judge may, in his discretion, take down, or cause to be taken down, any part of
 such evidence in the form of question and answer.
 (3) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the presiding Judge and shall form
 part of the record.
 312. In every case where evidence is taken down under sections 310 or 311,—
 (a) if the witness gives evidence in the language of the Court, it shall be taken
 down in that language;
 (b) if he gives evidence in any other language, it may, if practicable, be taken
 down in that language, and if it is not practicable to do so, a true translation of the
 evidence in the language of the Court shall be prepared as the examination of the
 witness proceeds, signed by the Magistrate or presiding Judge, and shall form part of
 the record;
 (c) where under clause (b) evidence is taken down in a language other than the
 language of the Court, a true translation thereof in the language of the Court shall be
 prepared as soon as practicable, signed by the Magistrate or presiding Judge, and
 shall form part of the record:
 Provided that when under clause (b) evidence is taken down in English and a
 translation thereof in the language of the Court is not required by any of the parties,
 the Court may dispense with such translation.
 313. (1) As the evidence of each witness taken under section 310 or section 311 is
 completed, it shall be read over to him in the presence of the accused, if in attendance, or of
 his pleader, if he appears by pleader, and shall, if necessary, be corrected.
 Record in
 warrant-cases.
 Record in trial
 before Court
 of Session.
 Language of
 record of
 evidence.
 Procedure in
 regard to such
 evidence when
 completed.
96
 (2) If the witness denies the correctness of any part of the evidence when the same is
 read over to him, the Magistrate or presiding Judge may, instead of correcting the evidence,
 make a memorandum thereon of the objection made to it by the witness and shall add such
 remarks as he thinks necessary.
 (3) If the record of the evidence is in a language different from that in which it has
 been given and the witness does not understand that language, the record shall be interpreted
 to him in the language in which it was given, or in a language which he understands.
 Interpretation
 of evidence to
 accused or his
 pleader.
 Remarks
 respecting
 demeanour of
 witness.
 Record of
 examination
 of accused.
 Interpreter to
 be bound to
 interpret
 truthfully.
 Record in
 High Court.
 When
 attendance of
 witness may be
 dispensed with
 and commission
 issued.
 314. (1) Whenever any evidence is given in a language not understood by the accused,
 and he is present in Court in person, it shall be interpreted to him in open Court in a
 language understood by him.
 (2) If he appears by pleader and the evidence is given in a language other than the
 language of the Court, and not understood by the pleader, it shall be interpreted to such
 pleader in that language.
 (3) When documents are put for the purpose of formal proof, it shall be in the discretion
 of the Court to interpret as much thereof as appears necessary.
 315. When a presiding Judge or Magistrate has recorded the evidence of a witness,
 he shall also record such remarks (if any) as he thinks material respecting the demeanour of
 such witness whilst under examination.
 316. (1) Whenever the accused is examined by any Magistrate, or by a Court of
 Session, the whole of such examination, including every question put to him and every
 answer given by him, shall be recorded in full by the presiding Judge or Magistrate himself
 or where he is unable to do so owing to a physical or other incapacity, under his direction
 and superintendence by an officer of the Court appointed by him in this behalf.
 (2) The record shall, if practicable, be in the language in which the accused is examined
 or, if that is not practicable, in the language of the Court.
 (3) The record shall be shown or read to the accused, or, if he does not understand the
 language in which it is written, shall be interpreted to him in a language which he understands,
 and he shall be at liberty to explain or add to his answers.
 (4) It shall thereafter be signed by the accused and by the Magistrate or presiding
 Judge, who shall certify under his own hand that the examination was taken in his presence
 and hearing and that the record contains a full and true account of the statement made by
 the accused:
 Provided that where the accused is in custody and is examined through electronic
 communication, his signature shall be taken within seventy-two hours of such examination.
 (5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to the examination of an accused
 person in the course of a summary trial.
 317. When the services of an interpreter are required by any Criminal Court for the
 interpretation of any evidence or statement, he shall be bound to state the true interpretation
 of such evidence or statement.
 318. Every High Court may, by general rule, prescribe the manner in which the evidence
 of witnesses and the examination of the accused shall be taken down in cases coming
 before it, and such evidence and examination shall be taken down in accordance with such
 rule.
 B.—Commissions for the examination of witnesses
 319. (1) Whenever, in the course of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this
 Sanhita, it appears to a Court or Magistrate that the examination of a witness is necessary
 for the ends of justice, and that the attendance of such witness cannot be procured without
 an amount of delay, expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of the case,
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
