 (3) When an offence is compoundable under this section, the abetment of such
 offence or an attempt to commit such offence (when such attempt is itself an offence) or
 where the accused is liable under sub-section (5) of section 3 or section 188 of the Bharatiya
 Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, may be compounded in like manner.
 (4) (a) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound an offence
 under this section is under the age of eighteen years or has intellectual disability requiring
 high support needs or is a person with mental illness, any person competent to contract on
 his behalf may, with the permission of the Court, compound such offence.
 (b) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound an offence
 under this section is dead, the legal representative, as defined in the Code of Civil
 Procedure, 1908 of such person may, with the consent of the Court, compound such offence.
 (5) When the accused has been committed for trial or when he has been convicted
 and an appeal is pending, no composition for the offence shall be allowed without the leave
 of the Court to which he is committed, or, as the case may be, before which the appeal is to
 be heard.
 (6) A High Court or Court of Session acting in the exercise of its powers of revision
 under section 442 may allow any person to compound any offence which such person is
 competent to compound under this section.
 (7) No offence shall be compounded if the accused is, by reason of a previous
 conviction, liable either to enhanced punishment or to a punishment of a different kind for
 such offence.
 (8) The composition of an offence under this section shall have the effect of an
 acquittal of the accused with whom the offence has been compounded.
 (9) No offence shall be compounded except as provided by this section.
 Withdrawal
 from
 prosecution.
 360. The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of a case may,
 with the consent of the Court, at any time before the judgment is pronounced, withdraw
 from the prosecution of any person either generally or in respect of any one or more of the
 offences for which he is tried; and, upon such withdrawal,—
 (a) if it is made before a charge has been framed, the accused shall be discharged
 in respect of such offence or offences;
 (b) if it is made after a charge has been framed, or when under this Sanhita no
 charge is required, he shall be acquitted in respect of such offence or offences:
 Provided that where such offence—
 (i) was against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the
 Union extends, or
 (ii) was investigated under any Central Act, or
 (iii) involved the misappropriation or destruction of, or damage to, any property
 belonging to the Central Government, or
 (iv) was committed by a person in the service of the Central Government while
 acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty,
 and the Prosecutor in charge of the case has not been appointed by the Central Government,
 he shall not, unless he has been permitted by the Central Government to do so, move the
 Court for its consent to withdraw from the prosecution and the Court shall, before according
 consent, direct the Prosecutor to produce before it the permission granted by the Central
 Government to withdraw from the prosecution:
 Provided further that no Court shall allow such withdrawal without giving an
 opportunity of being heard to the victim in the case.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 5 of 1908.
113
 361. (1) If, in the course of any inquiry into an offence or a trial before a Magistrate in
 any district, the evidence appears to him to warrant a presumption—
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (a) that he has no jurisdiction to try the case or commit it for trial, or
 (b) that the case is one which should be tried or committed for trial by some
 other Magistrate in the district, or
 (c) that the case should be tried by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, he shall stay
 the proceedings and submit the case, with a brief report explaining its nature, to the
 Chief Judicial Magistrate or to such other Magistrate, having jurisdiction, as the
 Chief Judicial Magistrate directs.
 (2) The Magistrate to whom the case is submitted may, if so empowered, either try the
 case himself, or refer it to any Magistrate subordinate to him having jurisdiction, or commit
 the accused for trial.
 362. If, in any inquiry into an offence or a trial before a Magistrate, it appears to him
 at any stage of the proceedings before signing the judgment that the case is one which
 ought to be tried by the Court of Session, he shall commit it to that Court under the
 provisions hereinbefore contained and thereupon the provisions of Chapter XIX shall
 apply to the commitment so made.
 363. (1) Where a person, having been convicted of an offence punishable under
 Chapter XII or Chapter XVII of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with imprisonment for a
 term of three years or upwards, is again accused of any offence punishable under either of
 those Chapters with imprisonment for a term of three years or upwards, and the Magistrate
 before whom the case is pending is satisfied that there is ground for presuming that such
 person has committed the offence, he shall be sent for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate
 or committed to the Court of Session, unless the Magistrate is competent to try the case and
 is of opinion that he can himself pass an adequate sentence if the accused is convicted.
 (2) When any person is sent for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or committed to
 the Court of Session under sub-section (1), any other person accused jointly with him in the
 same inquiry or trial shall be similarly sent or committed, unless the Magistrate discharges
 such other person under section 262 or section 268, as the case may be.
 364. (1) Whenever a Magistrate is of opinion, after hearing the evidence for the
 prosecution and the accused, that the accused is guilty, and that he ought to receive a
 punishment different in kind from, or more severe than, that which such Magistrate is
 empowered to inflict, or, being a Magistrate of the second class, is of opinion that the
 accused ought to be required to execute a bond under section 125, he may record the
 opinion and submit his proceedings, and forward the accused, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate
 to whom he is subordinate.
 (2) When more accused person than one are being tried together, and the Magistrate
 considers it necessary to proceed under sub-section (1), in regard to any of such accused,
 he shall forward all the accused, who are in his opinion guilty, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
 (3) The Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom the proceedings are submitted may, if he
 thinks fit, examine the parties and recall and examine any witness who has already given
 evidence in the case and may call for and take any further evidence and shall pass such
 judgment, sentence or order in the case as he thinks fit, and is according to law.
 365. (1) Whenever any Judge or Magistrate, after having heard and recorded the
 whole or any part of the evidence in any enquiry or a trial, ceases to exercise jurisdiction
 therein and is succeeded by another Judge or Magistrate who has and who exercises such
 jurisdiction, the Judge or Magistrate so succeeding may act on the evidence so recorded by
 his predecessor, or partly recorded by his predecessor and partly recorded by himself:
 Procedure in
 cases which
 Magistrate
 cannot dispose
 of.
 Procedure
 when after
 commencement
 of inquiry or
 trial,
 Magistrate
 finds case
 should be
 committed.
 Trial of
 persons
 previously
 convicted of
 offences
 against
 coinage,
 stamp-law or
 property.
 Procedure
 when
 Magistrate
 cannot pass
 sentence
 sufficiently
 severe.
 Conviction or
 commitment
 on evidence
 partly recorded
 by one
 Magistrate and
 partly by
 another.
114
 Provided that if the succeeding Judge or Magistrate is of the opinion that further
 examination of any of the witnesses whose evidence has already been recorded is necessary
 in the interests of justice, he may re-summon any such witness, and after such further
 examination, cross-examination and re-examination, if any, as he may permit, the witness
 shall be discharged.
 (2) When a case is transferred under the provisions of this Sanhita from one Judge to
 another Judge or from one Magistrate to another Magistrate, the former shall be deemed to
 cease to exercise jurisdiction therein, and to be succeeded by the latter, within the meaning
 of sub-section (1).
 (3) Nothing in this section applies to summary trials or to cases in which proceedings
 have been stayed under section 361 or in which proceedings have been submitted to a
 superior Magistrate under section 364.
 Court to be
 open.
 Procedure in
 case of
 accused being
 person with
 mental illness.
 366. (1) The place in which any Criminal Court is held for the purpose of inquiring into
 or trying any offence shall be deemed to be an open Court, to which the public generally
 may have access, so far as the same can conveniently contain them:
 Provided that the presiding Judge or Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, order at any
 stage of any inquiry into, or trial of, any particular case, that the public generally, or any
 particular person, shall not have access to, or be or remain in, the room or building used by
 the Court.
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the inquiry into and trial
 of rape or an offence under section 64, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70 or
 section 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or under sections 4, 6, 8 or section 10 of the
 Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 shall be conducted in camera:
 Provided that the presiding Judge may, if he thinks fit, or on an application made by
 either of the parties, allow any particular person to have access to, or be or remain in, the
 room or building used by the Court:
 Provided further that in camera trial shall be conducted as far as practicable by a
 woman Judge or Magistrate.
 (3) Where any proceedings are held under sub-section (2), it shall not be lawful for
 any person to print or publish any matter in relation to any such proceedings except with
 the previous permission of the Court:
 Provided that the ban on printing or publication of trial proceedings in relation to an
 offence of rape may be lifted, subject to maintaining confidentiality of name and address of
 the parties.
 CHAPTER XXVIII
 PROVISONS AS TO ACCUSED PERSONS WITH MENTAL ILLNESS
 367. (1) When a Magistrate holding an inquiry has reason to believe that the person
 against whom the inquiry is being held is of person with mental illness and consequently
 incapable of making his defence, the Magistrate shall inquire into the fact of such mental
 illness, and shall cause such person to be examined by the civil surgeon of the district or
 such other medical person as the State Government may direct, and thereupon shall examine
 such surgeon or other medical person as a witness, and shall reduce the examination to
 writing.
 (2) If the civil surgeon finds the accused to be a person with mental illness, he shall
 refer such person to a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist of Government hospital or
 Government medical college for care, treatment and prognosis of the condition and the
 psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, as the case may be, shall inform the Magistrate whether
 the accused is suffering from mental illness:
 5
 10
 15
 20
 32 of 2012.
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
115
 Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given by the psychiatric
 or clinical psychologist, as the case may be, to the Magistrate, he may prefer an appeal
 before the Medical Board which shall consist of—
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 (a) head of psychiatry unit in the nearest Government hospital; and
 (b) a faculty member in psychiatry in the nearest Government medical college.
 (3) Pending such examination and inquiry, the Magistrate may deal with such person
 in accordance with the provisions of section 369.
 (4) If the Magistrate is informed that the person referred to in sub-section (2) has
 mental illness, the Magistrate shall further determine whether the mental illness renders the
 accused incapable of entering defence and if the accused is found so incapable, the
 Magistrate shall record a finding to that effect, and shall examine the record of evidence
 produced by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate of the accused but without
 questioning the accused, if he finds that no prima facie case is made out against the
 accused, he shall, instead of postponing the enquiry, discharge the accused and deal with
 him in the manner provided under section 369:
 Provided that if the Magistrate finds that a prima facie case is made out against the
 accused in respect of whom a finding of mental illness is arrived at, he shall postpone the
 proceeding for such period, as in the opinion of the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, is
 required for the treatment of the accused, and order the accused to be dealt with as provided
 under section 369.
 (5) If the Magistrate is informed that the person referred to in sub-section (2) is a
 person with mental illness, the Magistrate shall further determine whether the mental illness
 renders the accused incapable of entering defence, and if the accused is found so incapable,
 the Magistrate shall order closure of the inquiry and deal with the accused in the manner
 provided under section 369.
 368. (1) If at the trial of any person before a Magistrate or Court of Session, it appears
 to the Magistrate or Court that such person is suffering from mental illness and consequently
 incapable of making his defence, the Magistrate or Court shall, in the first instance, try the
 fact of such mental illness and incapacity, and if the Magistrate or Court, after considering
 such medical and other evidence as may be produced before him or it, is satisfied of the fact,
 he or it shall record a finding to that effect and shall postpone further proceedings in the
 case.
 (2) If during trial, the Magistrate or Court of Sessions finds the accused to be a
 person with mental illness, he or it shall refer such person to a psychiatrist or clinical
 psychologist for care and treatment, and the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, as the
 case may be, shall report to the Magistrate or Court whether the accused is suffering from
 mental illness:
 Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given by the psychiatric
 or clinical psychologist, as the case may be, to the Magistrate, he may prefer an appeal
 before the Medical Board which shall consist of—
 (a) head of psychiatry unit in the nearest Government hospital; and
 (b) a faculty member in psychiatry in the nearest medical college.
 (3) If the Magistrate or Court is informed that the person referred to in sub-section (2)
 is a person with mental illness, the Magistrate or Court shall further determine whether the
 mental illness renders the accused incapable of entering defence and if the accused is
 found so incapable, the Magistrate or Court shall record a finding to that effect and shall
 examine the record of evidence produced by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate
 of the accused but without questioning the accused, if the Magistrate or Court finds that no
 prima facie case is made out against the accused, he or it shall, instead of postponing the
 trial, discharge the accused and deal with him in the manner provided under section 369:
 Procedure in
 case of person
 with mental
 illness tried
 before Court.
116
 Provided that if the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is made out
 against the accused in respect of whom a finding of mental illness is arrived at, he shall
 postpone the trial for such period, as in the opinion of the psychiatrist or clinical
 psychologist, is required for the treatment of the accused.
 (4) If the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is made out against the
 accused and he is incapable of entering defence by reason of mental illness, he or it shall
 not hold the trial and order the accused to be dealt with in accordance with section 369.
 Release of
 person with
 mental illness
 pending
 investigation
 or trial.
 Resumption of
 inquiry or
 trial.
 Procedure on
 accused
 appearing
 before
 Magistrate or
 Court.
 369. (1) Whenever a person if found under section 367 or section 368 to be incapable
 of entering defence by reason of mental illness, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be,
 shall, whether the case is one in which bail may be taken or not, order release of such person
 on bail:
 Provided that the accused is suffering from mental illness which does not mandate
 in-patient treatment and a friend or relative undertakes to obtain regular out-patient
 psychiatric treatment from the nearest medical facility and to prevent from doing injury to
 himself or to any other person.
 (2) If the case is one in which, in the opinion of the Magistrate or Court, as the case
 may be, bail cannot be granted or if an appropriate undertaking is not given, he or it shall
 order the accused to be kept in such a place where regular psychiatric treatment can be
 provided, and shall report the action taken to the State Government:
 Provided that no order for the detention of the accused in a public mental health
 establishment shall be made otherwise than in accordance with such rules as the State
 Government may have made under the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
 (3) Whenever a person is found under section 367 or section 368 to be incapable of
 entering defence by reason of mental illness, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be,
 shall keeping in view the nature of the act committed and the extent of mental illness, further
 determine if the release of the accused can be ordered:
 Provided that—
 (a) if on the basis of medical opinion or opinion of a specialist, the Magistrate
 or Court, as the case may be, decide to order discharge of the accused, as provided
 under section 367 or section 368, such release may be ordered, if sufficient security is
 given that the accused shall be prevented from doing injury to himself or to any other
 person;
 (b) if the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, is of the opinion that discharge
 of the accused cannot be ordered, the transfer of the accused to a residential facility
 for persons with mental illness may be ordered wherein the accused may be provided
 care and appropriate education and training.
 370. (1) Whenever an inquiry or a trial is postponed under section 367 or section 368,
 the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, may at any time after the person concerned has
 ceased to be suffering from mental illness, resume the inquiry or trial and require the accused
 to appear or be brought before such Magistrate or Court.
 (2) When the accused has been released under section 369, and the sureties for his
 appearance produce him to the officer whom the Magistrate or Court appoints in this
 behalf, the certificate of such officer that the accused is capable of making his defence shall
 be receivable in evidence.
 371. (1) If, when the accused appears or is again brought before the Magistrate or
 Court, as the case may be, the Magistrate or Court considers him capable of making his
 defence, the inquiry or trial shall proceed.
 (2) If the Magistrate or Court considers the accused to be still incapable of making his
 defence, the Magistrate or Court shall act according to the provisions of section 367 or
 section 368, as the case may be, and if the accused is found to be suffering from mental
 illness and consequently incapable of making his defence, shall deal with such accused in
 accordance with the provisions of section 369.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 10 of 2017.
117
 5
 10
 15
 10 of 2017.
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 372. When the accused appears to be of sound mind at the time of inquiry or trial, and
 the Magistrate is satisfied from the evidence given before him that there is reason to believe
 that the accused committed an act, which, if he had not been having a mental illness, would
 have been an offence, and that he was, at the time when the act was committed, by reason
 of mental illness, incapable of knowing the nature of the act or that it was wrong or contrary
 to law, the Magistrate shall proceed with the case, and, if the accused ought to be tried by
 the Court of Session, commit him for trial before the Court of Session.
 373. Whenever any person is acquitted upon the ground that, at the time at which he
 is alleged to have committed an offence, he was, by reason of mental illness, incapable of
 knowing the nature of the act alleged as constituting the offence, or that it was wrong or
 contrary to law, the finding shall state specifically whether he committed the act or not.
 374. (1) Whenever the finding states that the accused person committed the act
 alleged, the Magistrate or Court before whom or which the trial has been held, shall, if such
 act would, but for the incapacity found, have constituted an offence,—
 (a) order such person to be detained in safe custody in such place and manner
 as the Magistrate or Court thinks fit; or
 (b) order such person to be delivered to any relative or friend of such person.
 (2) No order for the detention of the accused in a public mental health establishment
 shall be made under clause (a) of sub-section (1) otherwise than in accordance with such
 rules as the State Government may have made under the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
 (3) No order for the delivery of the accused to a relative or friend shall be made under
 clause (b) of sub-section (1) except upon the application of such relative or friend and on
 his giving security to the satisfaction of the Magistrate or Court that the person delivered
 shall—
 (a) be properly taken care of and prevented from doing injury to himself or to
 any other person;
 (b) be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places,
 as the State Government may direct.
 (4) The Magistrate or Court shall report to the State Government the action taken
 under sub-section (1).
 375. The State Government may empower the officer-in-charge of the jail in which a
 person is confined under the provisions of section 369 or section 374 to discharge all or any
 of the functions of the Inspector-General of Prisons under section 376 or section 377.
 376. If a person with mental illness is detained under the provisions of
 sub-section (2) of section 369, and in the case of a person detained in a jail, the
 Inspector-General of Prisons, or, in the case of a person detained in a public mental health
 establishment, the Mental Health Review Board constituted under the Mental Healthcare
 Act, 2017, shall certify that, in his or their opinion, such person is capable of making his
 defence, he shall be taken before the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, at such time
 as the Magistrate or Court appoints, and the Magistrate or Court shall deal with such
 person under the provisions of section 371; and the certificate of such Inspector-General or
 visitors as aforesaid shall be receivable as evidence.
 377. (1) If a person with mental illness is detained under the provisions of
 sub-section (2) of section 369, or section 374, and such Inspector-General or visitors shall
 certify that, in his or their judgment, he may be released without danger of his doing injury
 to himself or to any other person, the State Government may thereupon order him to be
 released, or to be detained in custody, or to be transferred to a public mental health
 establishment if he has not been already sent to such establishment; and, in case it orders
 him to be transferred to public mental health establishment, may appoint a Commission,
 consisting of a Judicial and two medical officers.
 When accused
 appears to
 have been of
 sound mind.
 Judgment of
 acquittal on
 ground of
 mental illness.
 Person
 acquitted on
 ground of
 mental illness
 to be detained
 in safe
 custody.
 Power of State
 Government
 to empower
 officer-in
charge to
 discharge.
 Procedure
 where prisoner
 with mental
 illness is
 reported
 capable of
 making his
 defence.
 Procedure
 where person
 with mental
 illness
 detained is
 declared fit to
 be released.
118
 (2) Such Commission shall make a formal inquiry into the state of mind of such
 person, take such evidence as is necessary, and shall report to the State Government, which
 may order his release or detention as it thinks fit.
 Delivery of
 person with
 mental illness
 to care of
 relative or
 friend.
 Procedure in
 cases
 mentioned in
 section 215.
 378. (1) Whenever any relative or friend of any person detained under the provisions
 of section 369 or section 374 desires that he shall be delivered to his care and custody, the
 State Government may, upon the application of such relative or friend and on his giving
 security to the satisfaction of such State Government, that the person delivered shall—
 (a) be properly taken care of and prevented from doing injury to himself or to
 any other person;
 (b) be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places,
 as the State Government may direct;
 (c) in the case of a person detained under sub-section (2) of section 369, be
 produced when required before such Magistrate or Court,
 order such person to be delivered to such relative or friend.
 (2) If the person so delivered is accused of any offence, the trial of which has been
 postponed by reason of his being of mental illness and incapable of making his defence,
 and the inspecting officer referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), certifies at any time to
 the Magistrate or Court that such person is capable of making his defence, such Magistrate
 or Court shall call upon the relative or friend to whom such accused was delivered to
 produce him before the Magistrate or Court; and, upon such production the Magistrate or
 Court shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of section 371, and the certificate of
 the inspecting officer shall be receivable as evidence.
 CHAPTER XXIX
 PROVISIONS AS TO OFFENCES AFFECTING THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE
 379. (1) When, upon an application made to it in this behalf or otherwise, any Court
 is of opinion that it is expedient in the interests of justice that an inquiry should be made
 into any offence referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 215, which appears to
 have been committed in or in relation to a proceeding in that Court or, as the case may be, in
 respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in that Court, such
 Court may, after such preliminary inquiry, if any, as it thinks necessary,—
 (a) record a finding to that effect;
 (b) make a complaint thereof in writing;
 (c) send it to a Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction;
 (d) take sufficient security for the appearance of the accused before such
 Magistrate, or if the alleged offence is non-bailable and the Court thinks it necessary
 so to do, send the accused in custody to such Magistrate; and
 (e) bind over any person to appear and give evidence before such Magistrate.
 (2) The power conferred on a Court by sub-section (1) in respect of an offence may,
 in any case where that Court has neither made a complaint under sub-section (1) in respect
 of that offence nor rejected an application for the making of such complaint, be exercised by
 the Court to which such former Court is subordinate within the meaning of sub-section (4)
 of section 215.
 (3) A complaint made under this section shall be signed,—
 (a) where the Court making the complaint is a High Court, by such officer of the
 Court as the Court may appoint;
 (b) in any other case, by the presiding officer of the Court or by such officer of
 the Court as the Court may authorise in writing in this behalf.
 (4) In this section, "Court" has the same meaning as in section 215.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
119
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 380. (1) Any person on whose application any Court other than a High Court has
 refused to make a complaint under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 379, or
 against whom such a complaint has been made by such Court, may appeal to the Court to
 which such former Court is subordinate within the meaning of sub-section (4) of
 section 215, and the superior Court may thereupon, after notice to the parties concerned,
 direct the withdrawal of the complaint, or, as the case may be, making of the complaint which
 such former Court might have made under section 379, and, if it makes such complaint, the
 provisions of that section shall apply accordingly.
 (2) An order under this section, and subject to any such order, an order under
 section 379, shall be final, and shall not be subject to revision.
 381. Any Court dealing with an application made to it for filing a complaint under
 section 379 or an appeal under section 380, shall have power to make such order as to costs
 as may be just.
 382. (1) A Magistrate to whom a complaint is made under section 379 or section 380
 shall, notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter XVI, proceed, as far as may be, to
 deal with the case as if it were instituted on a police report.
 (2) Where it is brought to the notice of such Magistrate, or of any other Magistrate to
 whom the case may have been transferred, that an appeal is pending against the decision
 arrived at in the judicial proceeding out of which the matter has arisen, he may, if he thinks
 fit, at any stage, adjourn the hearing of the case until such appeal is decided.
 383. (1) If, at the time of delivery of any judgment or final order disposing of any
 judicial proceeding, a Court of Session or Magistrate of the first class expresses an opinion
 to the effect that any witness appearing in such proceeding had knowingly or wilfully given
 false evidence or had fabricated false evidence with the intention that such evidence should
 be used in such proceeding, it or he may, if satisfied that it is necessary and expedient in the
 interest of justice that the witness should be tried summarily for giving or fabricating, as the
 case may be, false evidence, take cognizance of the offence and may, after giving the
 offender a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished for
 such offence, try such offender summarily and sentence him to imprisonment for a term
 which may extend to three months, or to fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
 with both.
 (2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly as may be practicable, the
 procedure prescribed for summary trials.
 (3) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of the Court to make a complaint
 under section 379 for the offence, where it does not choose to proceed under this section.
 (4) Where, after any action is initiated under sub-section (1), it is made to appear to
 the Court of Session or Magistrate of the first class that an appeal or an application for
 revision has been preferred or filed against the judgment or order in which the opinion
 referred to in that sub-section has been expressed, it or he shall stay further proceedings of
 the trial until the disposal of the appeal or the application for revision, as the case may be,
 and thereupon the further proceedings of the trial shall abide by the results of the appeal or
 application for revision.
 384. (1) When any such offence as is described in section 209, section 211,
 section 212, section 213 or section 265 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is committed in
 the view or presence of any Civil, Criminal, or Revenue Court, the Court may cause the
 offender to be detained in custody, and may, at any time before the rising of the Court or the
 same day, take cognizance of the offence and, after giving the offender a reasonable
 opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished under this section, sentence
 the offender to fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, and, in default of payment of fine,
 to simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, unless such fine be
 sooner paid.
 Appeal.
 Power to
 order costs.
 Procedure of
 Magistrate
 taking
 cognizance.
 Summary
 procedure for
 trial for giving
 false evidence.
 Procedure in
 certain cases
 of contempt.
120
 (2) In every such case the Court shall record the fact constituting the offence, with
 the statement (if any) made by the offender, as well as the finding and sentence.
 (3) If the offence is under section 265 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the record
 shall show the nature and stage of the judicial proceeding in which the Court interrupted or
 insulted was sitting, and the nature of the interruption or insult.
 Procedure
 where Court
 considers that
 case should
 not be dealt
 with under
 section 384.
 When
 Registrar or
 Sub-Registrar
 to be deemed a
 Civil Court.
 Discharge of
 offender on
 submission of
 apology.
 Imprisonment
 or commital
 of person
 refusing to
 answer or
 produce
 document.
 Summary
 procedure for
 punishment
 for non
attendance by
 a witness in
 obedience to
 summons.
 Appeals from
 convictions
 under sections
 383, 384, 388
 and 389.
 385. (1) If the Court in any case considers that a person accused of any of the
 offences referred to in section 384 and committed in its view or presence should be imprisoned
 otherwise than in default of payment of fine, or that a fine exceeding two hundred rupees
 should be imposed upon him, or such Court is for any other reason of opinion that the case
 should not be disposed of under section 384, such Court, after recording the facts
 constituting the offence and the statement of the accused as hereinbefore provided, may
 forward the case to a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the same, and may require
 security to be given for the appearance of such person before such Magistrate, or if sufficient
 security is not given, shall forward such person in custody to such Magistrate.
 (2) The Magistrate to whom any case is forwarded under this section shall proceed to
 deal with, as far as may be, as if it were instituted on a police report.
 386. When the State Government so directs, any Registrar or any Sub-Registrar
 appointed under the Registration Act, 1908, shall be deemed to be a Civil Court within the
 meaning of sections 384 and 385.
 387. When any Court has under section 384 adjudged an offender to punishment, or
 has under section 385 forwarded him to a Magistrate for trial, for refusing or omitting to do
 anything which he was lawfully required to do or for any intentional insult or interruption,
 the Court may, in its discretion, discharge the offender or remit the punishment on his
 submission to the order or requisition of such Court, or on apology being made to its
 satisfaction.
 388. If any witness or person called to produce a document or thing before a Criminal
 Court refuses to answer such questions as are put to him or to produce any document or
 thing in his possession or power which the Court requires him to produce, and does not,
 after a reasonable opportunity has been given to him so to do, offer any reasonable excuse
 for such refusal, such Court may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, sentence him to
 simple imprisonment, or by warrant under the hand of the Presiding Magistrate or Judge
 commit him to the custody of an officer of the Court for any term not exceeding seven days,
 unless in the meantime, such person consents to be examined and to answer, or to produce
 the document or thing and in the event of his persisting in his refusal, he may be dealt with
 according to the provisions of section 384 or section 385.
 389. (1) If any witness being summoned to appear before a Criminal Court is legally
 bound to appear at a certain place and time in obedience to the summons and without just
 excuse neglects or refuses to attend at that place or time or departs from the place where he
 has to attend before the time at which it is lawful for him to depart, and the Court before
 which the witness is to appear is satisfied that it is expedient in the interest of justice that
 such a witness should be tried summarily, the Court may take cognizance of the offence and
 after giving the offender an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished
 under this section, sentence him to fine not exceeding five hundred rupees.
 (2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly as may be practicable, the
 procedure prescribed for summary trials.
 390. (1) Any person sentenced by any Court other than a High Court under section
 383, section 384, section 388, or section 389 may, notwithstanding anything contained in
 this Sanhita appeal to the Court to which decrees or orders made in such Court are ordinarily
 appealable.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 16 of 1908.
121
 (2) The provisions of Chapter XXXI shall, so far as they are applicable, apply to
 appeals under this section, and the Appellate Court may alter or reverse the finding, or
 reduce or reverse the sentence appealed against.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 (3) An appeal from such conviction by a Court of Small Causes shall lie to the Court
 of Session for the sessions division within which such Court is situate.
 (4) An appeal from such conviction by any Registrar or Sub-Registrar deemed to be a
 Civil Court by virtue of a direction issued under section 386 shall lie to the Court of Session
 for the sessions division within which the office of such Registrar or Sub-Registrar is
 situate.
 391. Except as provided in sections 383, 384, 388 and 389, no Judge of a Criminal Court
 (other than a Judge of a High Court) or Magistrate shall try any person for any offence
 referred to in section 215, when such offence is committed before himself or in contempt of
 his authority, or is brought under his notice as such Judge or Magistrate in the course of a
 judicial proceeding.
 392. (1) The judgment in every trial in any Criminal Court or original jurisdiction shall
 be pronounced in open Court by the presiding officer immediately after the termination of
 the trial or at some subsequent time not later than forty-five days of which notice shall be
 given to the parties or their advocates,—
 (a) by delivering the whole of the judgment; or
 (b) by reading out the whole of the judgment; or
 (c) by reading out the operative part of the judgment and explaining the substance
 of the judgment in a language which is understood by the accused or his advocate.
 (2) Where the judgment is delivered under clause (a) of sub-section (1), the presiding
 officer shall cause it to be taken down in short-hand, sign the transcript and every page
 thereof as soon as it is made ready, and write on it the date of the delivery of the judgment
 in open Court.
 (3) Where the judgment or the operative part thereof is read out under clause (b) or
 clause (c) of sub-section (1), as the case may be, it shall be dated and signed by the
 presiding officer in open Court, and if it is not written with his own hand, every page of the
 judgment shall be signed by him.
 (4) Where the judgment is pronounced in the manner specified in clause (c) of
 sub-section (1), the whole judgment or a copy thereof shall be immediately made available
 for the perusal of the parties or their advocates free of cost:
 Provided that the Court shall, as far as practicable, upload the copy of the judgment
 on its portal within a period of seven days from the date of judgment.
 (5) If the accused is in custody, he shall be brought up to hear the judgment pronounced
 either in person or through audio-video electronic means.
 (6) If the accused is not in custody, he shall be required by the Court to attend to hear
 the judgment pronounced, except where his personal attendance during the trial has been
 dispensed with and the sentence is one of fine only or he is acquitted:
 Provided that where there are more accused persons than one, and one or more of
 them do not attend the Court on the date on which the judgment is to be pronounced, the
 presiding officer may, in order to avoid undue delay in the disposal of the case, pronounce
 the judgment notwithstanding their absence.
 Certain Judges
 and
 Magistrates
 not to try
 certain
 offences when
 committed
 before
 themselves.
 Judgment.
122
 (7) No judgment delivered by any Criminal Court shall be deemed to be invalid by
 reason only of the absence of any party or his advocate on the day or from the place
 notified for the delivery thereof, or of any omission to serve, or defect in serving, on the
 parties or their advocates, or any of them, the notice of such day and place.
 (8) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit in any way the extent of the
 provisions of section 513.
 Language and
 contents of
 judgment.
 Order for
 notifying
 address of
 previously
 convicted
 offender.
 393. (1) Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Sanhita, every judgment
 referred to in section 392,—
 (a) shall be written in the language of the Court;
 (b) shall contain the point or points for determination, the decision thereon and
 the reasons for the decision;
 (c) shall specify the offence (if any) of which, and the section of the Bharatiya
 Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or other law under which, the accused is convicted, and the
 punishment to which he is sentenced;
 (d) if it be a judgment of acquittal, shall state the offence of which the accused
 is acquitted and direct that he be set at liberty.
 (2) When the conviction is under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and it is doubtful
 under which of two sections, or under which of two parts of the same section, of that
 Sanhita the offence falls, the Court shall distinctly express the same, and pass judgment in
 the alternative.
 (3) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with death or, in the alternative,
 with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of years, the judgment shall state the
 reasons for the sentence awarded, and, in the case of sentence of death, the special reasons
 for such sentence.
 (4) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term of
 one year or more, but the Court imposes a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than
 three months, it shall record its reasons for awarding such sentence, unless the sentence is
 one of imprisonment till the rising of the Court or unless the case was tried summarily under
 the provisions of this Sanhita.
 (5) When any person is sentenced to death, the sentence shall direct that he be
 hanged by the neck till he is dead.
 (6) Every order under section 136 or sub-section (2) of section 157 and every final
 order made under section 144, section 164 or section 166 shall contain the point or points for
 determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for the decision.
 394. (1) When any person, having been convicted by a Court in India of an offence
 punishable with imprisonment for a term of three years, or upwards, is again convicted of
 any offence punishable under any of those sections or Chapters with imprisonment for a
 term of three years or upwards by any Court other than that of a Magistrate of the second
 class, such Court may, if it thinks fit, at the time of passing a sentence of imprisonment on
 such person, also order that his residence and any change of, or absence from, such
 residence after release be notified as hereinafter provided for a term not exceeding five
 years from the date of the expiration of such sentence.
 (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) with reference to the offences named therein,
 apply also to criminal conspiracies to commit such offences and to the abatement of such
 offences and attempts to commit them.
 (3) If such conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, such order shall become
 void.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
123
 (4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the
 High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision.
 5
 10
 15
 13 of 1855.
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (5) The State Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions
 of this section relating to the notification of residence or change of, or absence from,
 residence by released convicts.
 (6) Such rules may provide for punishment for the breach thereof and any person
 charged with a breach of any such rule may be tried by a Magistrate of competent jurisdiction
 in the district in which the place last notified by him as his place of residence is situated.
 395. (1) When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence (including a sentence
 of death) of which fine forms a part, the Court may, when passing judgment, order the whole
 or any part of the fine recovered to be applied—
 (a) in defraying the expenses properly incurred in the prosecution;
 (b) in the payment to any person of compensation for any loss or injury caused
 by the offence, when compensation is, in the opinion of the Court, recoverable by
 such person in a Civil Court;
 (c) when any person is convicted of any offence for having caused the death of
 another person or of having abetted the commission of such an offence, in paying
 compensation to the persons who are, under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855, entitled to
 recover damages from the person sentenced for the loss resulting to them from such
 death;
 (d) when any person is convicted of any offence which includes theft, criminal
 misappropriation, criminal breach of trust, or cheating, or of having dishonestly
 received or retained, or of having voluntarily assisted in disposing of, stolen property
 knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen, in compensating any
 bona fide purchaser of such property for the loss of the same if such property is
 restored to the possession of the person entitled thereto.
 (2) If the fine is imposed in a case which is subject to appeal, no such payment shall
 be made before the period allowed for presenting the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal be
 presented, before the decision of the appeal.
 (3) When a Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court
 may, when passing judgment, order the accused person to pay, by way of compensation,
 such amount as may be specified in the order to the person who has suffered any loss or
 injury by reason of the act for which the accused person has been so sentenced.
 (4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the
 High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision.
 (5) At the time of awarding compensation in any subsequent civil suit relating to the
 same matter, the Court shall take into account any sum paid or recovered as compensation
 under this section.
 396. (1) Every State Government in co-ordination with the Central Government shall
 prepare a scheme for providing funds for the purpose of compensation to the victim or his
 dependents who have suffered loss or injury as a result of the crime and who require
 rehabilitation.
 (2) Whenever a recommendation is made by the Court for compensation, the District
 Legal Service Authority or the State Legal Service Authority, as the case may be, shall
 decide the quantum of compensation to be awarded under the scheme referred to in
 sub-section (1).
 (3) If the trial Court, at the conclusion of the trial, is satisfied, that the compensation
 awarded under section 395 is not adequate for such rehabilitation, or where the cases end
 Order to pay
 compensation.
 Victim
 compensation
 scheme.
124
 in acquittal or discharge and the victim has to be rehabilitated, it may make recommendation
 for compensation.
 (4) Where the offender is not traced or identified, but the victim is identified, and
 where no trial takes place, the victim or his dependents may make an application to the State
 or the District Legal Services Authority for award of compensation.
 (5) On receipt of such recommendations or on the application under sub-section (4),
 the State or the District Legal Services Authority shall, after due enquiry award adequate
 compensation by completing the enquiry within two months.
 (6) The State or the District Legal Services Authority, as the case may be, to alleviate
 the suffering of the victim, may order for immediate first-aid facility or medical benefits to be
 made available free of cost on the certificate of the police officer not below the rank of the
 officer in charge of the police station or a Magistrate of the area concerned, or any other
 interim relief as the appropriate authority deems fit.
 (7) The compensation payable by the State Government under this section shall be in
 addition to the payment of fine to the victim under section 67(4), section 68, section 70(1)
 and section 70(2) of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 Treatment of
 victims.
 Witness
 protection
 scheme.
 Compensation
 to persons
 groundlessly
 arrested.
 Order to pay
 costs in non
cognizable
 cases.
 Order to release
 on probation of
 good conduct or
 after
 admonition.
 397. All hospitals, public or private, whether run by the Central Government, the State
 Government, local bodies or any other person, shall immediately, provide the first-aid or
 medical treatment, free of cost, to the victims of any offence covered under section 122,
 section 64, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70, section 71 or section 122 of the
 Bharatiya Nyaya, Sanhita, 2023 or under sections 4, 6, 8 or section 10 of the Protection of
 Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, and shall immediately inform the police of such
 incident.
 398. Every State Government shall prepare and notify a Witness Protection Scheme
 for the State with a view to ensure protection of the witnesses.
 399. (1) Whenever any person causes a police officer to arrest another person, if it
 appears to the Magistrate by whom the case is heard that there was no sufficient ground for
 causing such arrest, the Magistrate may award such compensation, not exceeding one
 thousand rupees, to be paid by the person so causing the arrest to the person so arrested,
 for his loss of time and expenses in the matter, as the Magistrate thinks fit.
 (2) In such cases, if more persons than one are arrested, the Magistrate may, in like
 manner, award to each of them such compensation, not exceeding one thousand rupees, as
 such Magistrate thinks fit.
 (3) All compensation awarded under this section may be recovered as if it were a fine,
 and, if it cannot be so recovered, the person by whom it is payable shall be sentenced to
 simple imprisonment for such term not exceeding thirty days as the Magistrate directs,
 unless such sum is sooner paid.
 400. (1) Whenever any complaint of a non-cognizable offence is made to a Court, the
 Court, if it convicts the accused, may, in addition to the penalty imposed upon him, order
 him to pay to the complainant, in whole or in part, the cost incurred by him in the prosecution,
 and may further order that in default of payment, the accused shall suffer simple imprisonment
 for a period not exceeding thirty days and such costs may include any expenses incurred in
 respect of process-fees, witnesses and advocate's fees which the Court may consider
 reasonable.
 (2) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the
 High Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision.
 401. (1) When any person not under twenty-one years of age is convicted of an
 offence punishable with fine only or with imprisonment for a term of seven years or less, or
 when any person under twenty-one years of age or any woman is convicted of an offence
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 32 of 2012.
125
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 20 of 1958.
 2 of 2016.
 not punishable with death or imprisonment for life, and no previous conviction is proved
 against the offender, if it appears to the Court before which he is convicted, regard being
 had to the age, character or antecedents of the offender, and to the circumstances in which
 the offence was committed, that it is expedient that the offender should be released on
 probation of good conduct, the Court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any
 punishment, direct that he be released on his entering into a bond, with or without sureties,
 to appear and receive sentence when called upon during such period (not exceeding three
 years) as the Court may direct, and in the meantime to keep the peace and be of good behavior:
 Provided that where any first offender is convicted by a Magistrate of the second
 class not specially empowered by the High Court, and the Magistrate is of opinion that the
 powers conferred by this section should be exercised, he shall record his opinion to that
 effect, and submit the proceedings to a Magistrate of the first class, forwarding the accused
 to, or taking bail for his appearance before, such Magistrate, who shall dispose of the case
 in the manner provided by sub-section (2).
 (2) Where proceedings are submitted to a Magistrate of the first class as provided by
 sub-section (1), such Magistrate may thereupon pass such sentence or make such order as
 he might have passed or made if the case had originally been heard by him, and, if he thinks
 further inquiry or additional evidence on any point to be necessary, he may make such
 inquiry or take such evidence himself or direct such inquiry or evidence to be made or taken.
 (3) In any case in which a person is convicted of theft, theft in a building, dishonest
 misappropriation, cheating or any offence under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023,
 punishable with not more than two years, imprisonment or any offence punishable with fine
 only and no previous conviction is proved against him, the Court before which he is so
 convicted may, if it thinks fit, having regard to the age, character, antecedents or physical or
 mental condition of the offender and to the trivial nature of the offence or any extenuating
 circumstances under which the offence was committed, instead of sentencing him to any
 punishment, release him after due admonition.
 (4) An order under this section may be made by any Appellate Court or by the High
 Court or Court of Session when exercising its powers of revision.
 (5) When an order has been made under this section in respect of any offender, the
 High Court or Court of Session may, on appeal when there is a right of appeal to such Court,
 or when exercising its powers of revision, set aside such order, and in lieu thereof pass
 sentence on such offender according to law:
 Provided that the High Court or Court of Session shall not under this sub-section
 inflict a greater punishment than might have been inflicted by the Court by which the
 offender was convicted.
 (6) The provisions of sections 140, 143 and 414 shall, so far as may be, apply in the
 case of sureties offered in pursuance of the provisions of this section.
 (7) The Court, before directing the release of an offender under sub-section (1), shall
 be satisfied that an offender or his surety (if any) has a fixed place of abode or regular
 occupation in the place for which the Court acts or in which the offender is likely to live
 during the period named for the observance of the conditions.
 (8) If the Court which convicted the offender, or a Court which could have dealt with
 the offender in respect of his original offence, is satisfied that the offender has failed to
 observe any of the conditions of his recognizance, it may issue a warrant for his apprehension.
 (9) An offender, when apprehended on any such warrant, shall be brought forthwith
 before the Court issuing the warrant, and such Court may either remand him in custody until
 the case is heard or admit him to bail with a sufficient surety conditioned on his appearing
 for sentence and such Court may, after hearing the case, pass sentence.
 (10) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of the Probation of Offenders
 Act, 1958, or the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 or any other
 law for the time being in force for the treatment, training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders.
126
 Special
 reasons to be
 recorded in
 certain cases.
 Court not to
 alter
 judgment.
 Copy of
 judgment to be
 given to the
 accused and
 other persons.
 Judgment
 when to be
 translated.
 Court of
 Session to
 send copy of
 finding and
 sentence to
 District
 402. Where in any case the Court could have dealt with,—
 (a) an accused person under section 401 or under the provisions of the Probation
 of Offenders Act, 1958; or
 (b) a youthful offender under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
 Children) Act, 2015 or any other law for the time being in force for the treatment,
 training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders,
 but has not done so, it shall record in its judgment the special reasons for not having done
 so.
 403. Save as otherwise provided by this Sanhita or by any other law for the time being
 in force, no Court, when it has signed its judgment or final order disposing of a case, shall
 alter or review the same except to correct a clerical or arithmetical error.
 404. (1) When the accused is sentenced to imprisonment, a copy of the judgment
 shall, immediately after the pronouncement of the judgment, be given to him free of cost.
 (2) On the application of the accused, a certified copy of the judgment, or when he so
 desires, a translation in his own language if practicable or in the language of the Court, shall
 be given to him without delay, and such copy shall, in every case where the judgment is
 appealable by the accused, be given free of cost:
 Provided that where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, a
 certified copy of the judgment shall be immediately given to the accused free of cost
 whether or not he applies for the same.
 (3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply in relation to an order under
 section 136 as they apply in relation to a judgment which is appealable by the accused.
 (4) When the accused is sentenced to death by any Court and an appeal lies from
 such judgment as of right, the Court shall inform him of the period within which, if he wishes
 to appeal, his appeal should be preferred.
 (5) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), any person affected by a judgment
 or order passed by a Court shall, on an application made in this behalf and on payment of
 the prescribed charges, be given a copy of such judgment or order or of any deposition or
 other part of the record:
 Provided that the Court may, if it thinks fit for some special reason, give it to him free
 of cost:
 Provided further that the Court may, on an application made in this behalf by the
 Prosecuting Officer, provide to the Government, free of cost, a certified copy of such
 judgment, order, deposition or record.
 (6) The High Court may, by rules, provide for the grant of copies of any judgment or
 order of a Criminal Court to any person who is not affected by a judgment or order, on
 payment, by such person, of such fees, and subject to such conditions, as the High Court
 may, by such rules, provide.
 405. The original judgment shall be filed with the record of the proceedings and
 where the original is recorded in a language different from that of the Court, and if either
 party so requires, a translation thereof into the language of the Court shall be added to such
 record.
 406. In cases tried by the Court of Session or a Chief Judicial Magistrate, the Court or
 such Magistrate, as the case may be, shall forward a copy of its or his finding and sentence
 (if any) to the District Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the trial was held.
 20 of 1958.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 2 of 2016.
 Magistrate.
127
 CHAPTER XXX
 SUBMISSION OF DEATH SENTENCES FOR CONFIRMATION
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 407. (1) When the Court of Session passes a sentence of death, the proceedings shall
 forthwith be submitted to the High Court, and the sentence shall not be executed unless it
 is confirmed by the High Court.
 (2) The Court passing the sentence shall commit the convicted person to jail custody
 under a warrant.
 408. (1) If, when such proceedings are submitted, the High Court thinks that a further
 inquiry should be made into, or additional evidence taken upon, any point bearing upon the
 guilt or innocence of the convicted person, it may make such inquiry or take such evidence
 itself, or direct it to be made or taken by the Court of Session.
 (2) Unless the High Court otherwise directs, the presence of the convicted person
 may be dispensed with when such inquiry is made or such evidence is taken.
 (3) When the inquiry or evidence (if any) is not made or taken by the High Court, the
 result of such inquiry or evidence shall be certified to such Court.
 409. In any case submitted under section 407, the High Court—
 (a) may confirm the sentence, or pass any other sentence warranted by law, or
 (b) may annul the conviction, and convict the accused of any offence of which
 the Court of Session might have convicted him, or order a new trial on the same or an
 amended charge, or
 (c) may acquit the accused person:
 Provided that no order of confirmation shall be made under this section until the
 period allowed for preferring an appeal has expired, or, if an appeal is presented within such
 period, until such appeal is disposed of.
 410. In every case so submitted, the confirmation of the sentence, or any new sentence
 or order passed by the High Court, shall, when such Court consists of two or more Judges,
 be made, passed and signed by at least two of them.
 411. Where any such case is heard before a Bench of Judges and such Judges are
 equally divided in opinion, the case shall be decided in the manner provided by section 433.
 412. In cases submitted by the Court of Session to the High Court for the confirmation
 of a sentence of death, the proper officer of the High Court shall, without delay, after the
 order of confirmation or other order has been made by the High Court, send either physically,
 or through electronic means, a copy of the order, under the seal of the High Court and
 attested with his official signature, to the Court of Session.
 CHAPTER XXXI
 APPEALS
 413. No appeal shall lie from any judgment or order of a Criminal Court except as
 provided for by this Sanhita or by any other law for the time being in force:
 Provided that the victim shall have a right to prefer an appeal against any order
 passed by the Court acquitting the accused or convicting for a lesser offence or imposing
 inadequate compensation, and such appeal shall lie to the Court to which an appeal ordinarily
 lies against the order of conviction of such Court.
 Sentence of
 death to be
 submitted by
 Court of
 Session for
 confirmation.
 Power to
 direct further
 inquiry to be
 made or
 additional
 evidence to be
 taken.
 Power of High
 Court to
 confirm
 sentence or
 annul
 conviction.
 Confirmation
 or new
 sentence to be
 signed by two
 Judges.
 Procedure in
 case of
 difference of
 opinion.
 Procedure in
 cases
 submitted to
 High Court for
 confirmation.
 No appeal to
 lie unless
 otherwise
 provided.
128
 Appeal from
 orders
 requiring
 security or
 refusal to
 accept or
 rejecting
 surety for
 keeping peace
 or good
 behaviour.
 Appeals from
 convictions.
 No appeal in
 certain cases
 when accused
 pleads guilty.
 No appeal in
 petty cases.
 414. Any person,—
 (i) who has been ordered under section 136 to give security for keeping the
 peace or for good behaviour, or
 (ii) who is aggrieved by any order refusing to accept or rejecting a surety under
 section 140,
 may appeal against such order to the Court of Session:
 Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to persons the proceedings against
 whom are laid before a Sessions Judge in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2)
 or sub-section (4), of section 141.
 415. (1) Any person convicted on a trial held by a High Court in its extraordinary
 original criminal jurisdiction may appeal to the Supreme Court.
 (2) Any person convicted on a trial held by a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions
 Judge or on a trial held by any other Court in which a sentence of imprisonment for more
 than seven years has been passed against him or against any other person convicted at the
 same trial, may appeal to the High Court.
 (3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), any person,—
 (a) convicted on a trial held by Magistrate of the first class, or of the second
 class, or
 (b) sentenced under section 364, or
 (c) in respect of whom an order has been made or a sentence has been passed
 under section 401 by any Magistrate,
 may appeal to the Court of Session.
 (4) When an appeal has been filed against a sentence passed under section 64,
 section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70 or section 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
 Sanhita, 2023, the appeal shall be disposed of within a period of six months from the date of
 filing of such appeal.
 416. Notwithstanding anything in section 415, where an accused person has pleaded
 guilty and has been convicted on such plea, there shall be no appeal,—
 (i) if the conviction is by a High Court; or
 (ii) if the conviction is by a Court of Session or Magistrate of the first or second
 class, except as to the extent or legality of the sentence.
 417. Notwithstanding anything in section 415, there shall be no appeal by a convicted
 person in any of the following cases, namely:—
 (a) where a High Court passes only a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
 exceeding three months or of fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, or of both
 such imprisonment and fine;
 (b) where a Court of Session passes only a sentence of imprisonment for a term
 not exceeding three months or of fine not exceeding two hundred rupees, or of both
 such imprisonment and fine;
 (c) where a Magistrate of the first class passes only a sentence of fine not
 exceeding one hundred rupees; or
 (d) where, in a case tried summarily, a Magistrate empowered to act under
 section 283 passes only a sentence of fine not exceeding two hundred rupees:
 Provided that an appeal may be brought against such sentence if any other punishment
 is combined with it, but such sentence shall not be appealable merely on the ground—
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
129
 (i) that the person convicted is ordered to furnish security to keep the peace; or
 (ii) that a direction for imprisonment in default of payment of fine is included in the
 sentence; or
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (iii) that more than one sentence of fine is passed in the case, if the total amount of
 fine imposed does not exceed the amount hereinbefore specified in respect of the case.
 418. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the State Government may, in
 any case of conviction on a trial held by any Court other than a High Court, direct the Public
 Prosecutor to present an appeal against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy—
 (a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by the Magistrate; and
 (b) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any other Court.
 (2) If such conviction is in a case in which the offence has been investigated by any
 agency empowered to make investigation into an offence under any Central Act other than
 this Sanhita, the Central Government may also direct the Public Prosecutor to present an
 appeal against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy—
 (a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by the Magistrate; and
 (b) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any other Court.
 (3) When an appeal has been filed against the sentence on the ground of its
 inadequacy, the Court of Session or, as the case may be, the High Court shall not enhance
 the sentence except after giving to the accused a reasonable opportunity of showing cause
 against such enhancement and while showing cause, the accused may plead for his acquittal
 or for the reduction of the sentence.
 (4) When an appeal has been filed against a sentence passed under section 64,
 section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70 or section 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
 Sanhita, 2023, the appeal shall be disposed of within a period of six months from the date of
 filing of such appeal.
 419. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), and subject to the provisions
 of sub-sections (3) and (5),—
 (a) the District Magistrate may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to
 present an appeal to the Court of Session from an order of acquittal passed by a
 Magistrate in respect of a cognizable and non-bailable offence;
 (b) the State Government may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to
 present an appeal to the High Court from an original or appellate order of acquittal
 passed by any Court other than a High Court not being an order under clause (a) or
 an order of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in revision.
 (2) If such an order of acquittal is passed in a case in which the offence has been
 investigated by any agency empowered to make investigation into an offence under any
 Central Act other than this Sanhita, the Central Government may, subject to the provisions
 of sub-section (3), also direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal—
 (a) to the Court of Session, from an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate in
 respect of a cognizable and non-bailable offence;
 (b) to the High Court from an original or appellate order of an acquittal passed
 by any Court other than a High Court not being an order under clause (a) or an order
 of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in revision.
 (3) No appeal to the High Court under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be
 entertained except with the leave of the High Court.
 (4) If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case instituted upon complaint and
 the High Court, on an application made to it by the complainant in this behalf, grants special
 Appeal by the
 State
 Government
 against
 sentence.
 Appeal in case
 of acquittal.
130
 leave to appeal from the order of acquittal, the complainant may present such an appeal to
 the High Court.
 (5) No application under sub-section (4) for the grant of special leave to appeal from
 an order of acquittal shall be entertained by the High Court after the expiry of six months,
 where the complainant is a public servant, and sixty days in every other case, computed
 from the date of that order of acquittal.
 (6) If, in any case, the application under sub-section (4) for the grant of special leave
 to appeal from an order of acquittal is refused, no appeal from that order of acquittal shall lie
 under sub-section (1) or under sub-section (2).
 Appeal against
 conviction by
 High Court in
 certain cases.
 Special right
 of appeal in
 certain cases.
 Appeal to
 Court of
 Session how
 heard.
 Petition of
 appeal.
 Procedure
 when appellant
 in jail.
 Summary
 dismissal of
 appeal.
 420. Where the High Court has, on appeal, reversed an order of acquittal of an
 accused person and convicted him and sentenced him to death or to imprisonment for life
 or to imprisonment for a term of ten years or more, he may appeal to the Supreme Court.
 421. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, when more persons than
 one are convicted in one trial, and an appealable judgment or order has been passed in
 respect of any of such persons, all or any of the persons convicted at such trial shall have
 a right of appeal.
 422. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), an appeal to the Court of
 Session or Sessions Judge shall be heard by the Sessions Judge or by an Additional
 Sessions Judge:
 Provided that an appeal against a conviction on a trial held by a Magistrate of the
 second class may be heard and disposed of by the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
 (2) An Additional Sessions Judge or a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall hear only such
 appeals as the Sessions Judge of the division may, by general or special order, make over to
 him or as the High Court may, by special order, direct him to hear.
 423. Every appeal shall be made in the form of a petition in writing presented by the
 appellant or his advocate, and every such petition shall (unless the Court to which it is
 presented otherwise directs) be accompanied by a copy of the judgment or order appealed
 against.
 424. If the appellant is in jail, he may present his petition of appeal and the copies
 accompanying the same to the officer in charge of the jail, who shall thereupon forward
 such petition and copies to the proper Appellate Court.
 425. (1) If upon examining the petition of appeal and copy of the judgment received
 under section 423 or section 424, the Appellate Court considers that there is no sufficient
 ground for interfering, it may dismiss the appeal summarily:
 Provided that—
 (a) no appeal presented under section 423 shall be dismissed unless the appellant
 or his advocate has had a reasonable opportunity of being heard in support of the
 same;
 (b) no appeal presented under section 424 shall be dismissed except after giving
 the appellant a reasonable opportunity of being heard in support of the same, unless
 the Appellate Court considers that the appeal is frivolous or that the production of
 the accused in custody before the Court would involve such inconvenience as would
 be disproportionate in the circumstances of the case;
 (c) no appeal presented under section 424 shall be dismissed summarily until
 the period allowed for preferring such appeal has expired.
 (2) Before dismissing an appeal under this section, the Court may call for the record of
 the case.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
131
 (3) Where the Appellate Court dismissing an appeal under this section is a Court of
 Session or of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, it shall record its reasons for doing so.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (4) Where an appeal presented under section 424 has been dismissed summarily
 under this section and the Appellate Court finds that another petition of appeal duly presented
 under section 423 on behalf of the same appellant has not been considered by it, that Court
 may, notwithstanding anything contained in section 434, if satisfied that it is necessary in
 the interests of justice so to do, hear and dispose of such appeal in accordance with law.
 426. (1) If the Appellate Court does not dismiss the appeal summarily, it shall cause
 notice of the time and place at which such appeal will be heard to be given—
 (i) to the appellant or his advocate;
 (ii) to such officer as the State Government may appoint in this behalf;
 (iii) if the appeal is from a judgment of conviction in a case instituted upon
 complaint, to the complainant;
 (iv) if the appeal is under section 419 or section 420, to the accused, and shall
 also furnish such officer, complainant and accused with a copy of the grounds of
 appeal.
 (2) The Appellate Court shall then send for the record of the case, if such record is not
 already available in that Court, and hear the parties:
 Provided that if the appeal is only as to the extent or the legality of the sentence, the
 Court may dispose of the appeal without sending for the record.
 (3) Where the only ground for appeal from a conviction is the alleged severity of the
 sentence, the appellant shall not, except with the leave of the Court, urge or be heard in
 support of any other ground.
 427. After perusing such record and hearing the appellant or his advocate, if he
 appears, and the Public Prosecutor if he appears, and in case of an appeal under section 418
 or section 419, the accused, if he appears, the Appellate Court may, if it considers that there
 is no sufficient ground for interfering, dismiss the appeal, or may—
 (a) in an appeal from an order or acquittal, reverse such order and direct that
 further inquiry be made, or that the accused be re-tried or committed for trial, as the
 case may be, or find him guilty and pass sentence on him according to law;
 (b) in an appeal from a conviction—
 (i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused,
 or order him to be re-tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction subordinate to
 such Appellate Court or committed for trial, or
 (ii) alter the finding, maintaining the sentence, or
 (iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, or
 the nature and extent, of the sentence, but not so as to enhance the same;
 (c) in an appeal for enhancement of sentence—
 (i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused
 or order him to be re-tried by a Court competent to try the offence, or
 (ii) alter the finding maintaining the sentence, or
 (iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, or,
 the nature and extent, of the sentence, so as to enhance or reduce the same;
 (d) in an appeal from any other order, alter or reverse such order;
 (e) make any amendment or any consequential or incidental order that may be
 just or proper:
 Procedure for
 hearing
 appeals not
 dismissed
 summarily.
 Powers of the
 Appellate
 Court.
132
 Provided that the sentence shall not be enhanced unless the accused has had an
 opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement:
 Provided further that the Appellate Court shall not inflict greater punishment for the
 offence which in its opinion the accused has committed, than might have been inflicted for
 that offence by the Court passing the order or sentence under appeal.
 Judgments of
 Subordinate
 Appellate
 Court.
 Order of High
 Court on
 appeal to be
 certified to
 lower Court.
 Suspension of
 sentence
 pending the
 appeal; release
 of appellant
 on bail.
 Arrest of
 accused in
 appeal from
 acquittal.
 428. The rules contained in Chapter XXVIII as to the judgment of a Criminal Court of
 original jurisdiction shall apply, so far as may be practicable, to the judgment in appeal of a
 Court of Session or Chief Judicial Magistrate:
 Provided that, unless the Appellate Court otherwise directs, the accused shall not be
 brought up, or required to attend, to hear judgment delivered.
 429. (1) Whenever a case is decided on appeal by the High Court under this Chapter,
 it shall certify its judgment or order to the Court by which the finding, sentence or order
 appealed against was recorded or passed and if such Court is that of a Judicial Magistrate
 other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate, the High Court's judgment or order shall be sent
 through the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and if such Court is that of an Executive Magistrate,
 the High Court's judgment or order shall be sent through the District Magistrate.
 (2) The Court to which the High Court certifies its judgment or order shall thereupon
 make such orders as are conformable to the judgment or order of the High Court; and if
 necessary, the record shall be amended in accordance therewith.
 430. (1) Pending any appeal by a convicted person, the Appellate Court may, for
 reasons to be recorded by it in writing, order that the execution of the sentence or order
 appealed against be suspended and, also, if he is in confinement, that he be released on bail,
 or on his own bond:
 Provided that the Appellate Court shall, before releasing on bail or on his own bond
 a convicted person who is convicted of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment
 for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years, shall give opportunity to the
 Public Prosecutor for showing cause in writing against such release:
 Provided further that in cases where a convicted person is released on bail it shall be
 open to the Public Prosecutor to file an application for the cancellation of the bail.
 (2) The power conferred by this section on an Appellate Court may be exercised also
 by the High Court in the case of an appeal by a convicted person to a Court subordinate
 thereto.
 (3) Where the convicted person satisfies the Court by which he is convicted that he
 intends to present an appeal, the Court shall,—
 (i) where such person, being on bail, is sentenced to imprisonment for a term
 not exceeding three years, or
 (ii) where the offence of which such person has been convicted is a bailable
 one, and he is on bail,
 order that the convicted person be released on bail, unless there are special reasons for
 refusing bail, for such period as will afford sufficient time to present the appeal and obtain
 the orders of the Appellate Court under sub-section (1); and the sentence of imprisonment
 shall, so long as he is so released on bail, be deemed to be suspended.
 (4) When the appellant is ultimately sentenced to imprisonment for a term or to
 imprisonment for life, the time during which he is so released shall be excluded in computing
 the term for which he is so sentenced.
 431. When an appeal is presented under section 419, the High Court may issue a
 warrant directing that the accused be arrested and brought before it or any Subordinate
 Court, and the Court before which he is brought may commit him to prison pending the
 disposal of the appeal or admit him to bail.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
133
 432. (1) In dealing with any appeal under this Chapter, the Appellate Court, if it thinks
 additional evidence to be necessary, shall record its reasons and may either take such
 evidence itself, or direct it to be taken by a Magistrate or, when the Appellate Court is a High
 Court, by a Court of Session or a Magistrate.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (2) When the additional evidence is taken by the Court of Session or the Magistrate,
 it or he shall certify such evidence to the Appellate Court, and such Court shall thereupon
 proceed to dispose of the appeal.
 (3) The accused or his advocate shall have the right to be present when the additional
 evidence is taken.
 (4) The taking of evidence under this section shall be subject to the provisions of
 Chapter XXIV, as if it were an inquiry.
 433. When an appeal under this Chapter is heard by a High Court before a Bench of
 Judges and they are divided in opinion, the appeal, with their opinions, shall be laid before
 another Judge of that Court, and that Judge, after such hearing as he thinks fit, shall deliver
 his opinion, and the judgment or order shall follow that opinion:
 Provided that if one of the Judges constituting the Bench, or, where the appeal is laid
 before another Judge under this section, that Judge, so requires, the appeal shall be
 re-heard and decided by a larger Bench of Judges.
 434. Judgments and orders passed by an Appellate Court upon an appeal shall be
 final, except in the cases provided for in section 418, section 419, sub-section (4) of section
 425 or Chapter XXXII:
 Provided that notwithstanding the final disposal of an appeal against conviction in
 any case, the Appellate Court may hear and dispose of, on the merits,—
 (a) an appeal against acquittal under section 419, arising out of the same case,
 or
 (b) an appeal for the enhancement of sentence under section 418, arising out of
 the same case.
 435. (1) Every other appeal under section 418 or section 419 shall finally abate on the
 death of the accused.
 (2) Every other appeal under this Chapter (except an appeal from a sentence of fine)
 shall finally abate on the death of the appellant:
 Provided that where the appeal is against a conviction and sentence of death or of
 imprisonment, and the appellant dies during the pendency of the appeal, any of his near
 relatives may, within thirty days of the death of the appellant, apply to the Appellate Court
 for leave to continue the appeal; and if leave is granted, the appeal shall not abate.
 Explanation.—In this section, "near relative" means a parent, spouse, lineal
 descendant, brother or sister.
 CHAPTER XXXII
 REFERENCE AND REVISION
 436. (1) Where any Court is satisfied that a case pending before it involves a question
 as to the validity of any Act, Ordinance or Regulation or of any provision contained in an
 Act, Ordinance or Regulation, the determination of which is necessary for the disposal of
 the case, and is of opinion that such Act, Ordinance, Regulation or provision is invalid or
 inoperative, but has not been so declared by the High Court to which that Court is
 Subordinate or by the Supreme Court, the Court shall state a case setting out its opinion
 and the reasons therefor, and refer the same for the decision of the High Court.
 Appellate
 Court may
 take further
 evidence or
 direct it to be
 taken.
 Procedure
 where Judges
 of Court of
 Appeal are
 equally
 divided.
 Finality of
 judgments and
 orders on
 appeal.
 Abatement of
 appeals.
 Reference to
 High Court.
134
 Explanation.—In this section, "Regulation" means any Regulation as defined in the
 General Clauses Act, 1897, or in the General Clauses Act of a State.
 (2) A Court of Session may, if it or he thinks fit in any case pending before it or him to
 which the provisions of sub-section (1) do not apply, refer for the decision of the High
 Court any question of law arising in the hearing of such case.
 (3) Any Court making a reference to the High Court under sub-section (1) or
 sub-section (2) may, pending the decision of the High Court thereon, either commit the
 accused to jail or release him on bail to appear when called upon.
 Disposal of
 case according
 to decision of
 High Court.
 Calling for
 records to
 exercise
 powers of
 revision.
 Power to
 order inquiry.
 Sessions
 Judge's powers
 of revision.
 Power of
 Additional
 Sessions Judge.
 437. (1) When a question has been so referred, the High Court shall pass such order
 thereon as it thinks fit, and shall cause a copy of such order to be sent to the Court by which
 the reference was made, which shall dispose of the case conformably to the said order.
 (2) The High Court may direct by whom the costs of such reference shall be paid.
 438. (1) The High Court or any Sessions Judge may call for and examine the record of
 any proceeding before any inferior Criminal Court situate within its or his local jurisdiction
 for the purpose of satisfying itself or himself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of
 any finding, sentence or order, recorded or passed, and as to the regularity of any
 proceedings of such inferior Court, and may, when calling, for such record, direct that the
 execution of any sentence or order be suspended, and if the accused is in confinement that
 he be released on bail or on his own bond pending the examination of the record.
 Explanation.—All Magistrates, whether Executive or Judicial, and whether exercising
 original or appellate jurisdiction, shall be deemed to be inferior to the Sessions Judge for the
 purposes of this sub-section and of section 439.
 (2) The powers of revision conferred by sub-section (1) shall not be exercised in
 relation to any interlocutory order passed in any appeal, inquiry, trial or other proceeding.
 (3) If an application under this section has been made by any person either to the
 High Court or to the Sessions Judge, no further application by the same person shall be
 entertained by the other of them.
 439. On examining any record under section 438 or otherwise, the High Court or the
 Sessions Judge may direct the Chief Judicial Magistrate by himself or by any of the
 Magistrates subordinate to him to make, and the Chief Judicial Magistrate may himself
 make or direct any subordinate Magistrate to make, further inquiry into any complaint
 which has been dismissed under section 226 or sub-section (4) of section 227, or into the
 case of any person accused of an offence who has been discharged:
 Provided that no Court shall make any direction under this section for inquiry into the
 case of any person who has been discharged unless such person has had an opportunity of
 showing cause why such direction should not be made.
 440. (1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which has been called for by
 himself, the Sessions Judge may exercise all or any of the powers which may be exercised by
 the High Court under sub-section (1) of section 442.
 (2) Where any proceeding by way of revision is commenced before a Sessions Judge
 under sub-section (1), the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 442
 shall, so far as may be, apply to such proceeding and references in the said sub-sections to
 the High Court shall be construed as references to the Sessions Judge.
 (3) Where any application for revision is made by or on behalf of any person before
 the Sessions Judge, the decision of the Sessions Judge thereon in relation to such person
 shall be final and no further proceeding by way of revision at the instance of such person
 shall be entertained by the High Court or any other Court.
 441. An Additional Sessions Judge shall have and may exercise all the powers of a
 Sessions Judge under this Chapter in respect of any case which may be transferred to him
 by or under any general or special order of the Sessions Judge.
 10 of 1897.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
135
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 442. (1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which has been called for by itself
 or which otherwise comes to its knowledge, the High Court may, in its discretion, exercise
 any of the powers conferred on a Court of Appeal by sections 427, 430, 431 and 432 or on a
 Court of Session by section 344, and, when the Judges composing the Court of Revision are
 equally divided in opinion, the case shall be disposed of in the manner provided by
 section 433.
 (2) No order under this section shall be made to the prejudice of the accused or other
 person unless he has had an opportunity of being heard either personally or by advocate in
 his own defence.
 (3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a High Court to convert a
 finding of acquittal into one conviction.
 (4) Where under this Sanhita an appeal lies and no appeal is brought, no proceeding
 by way of revision shall be entertained at the instance of the party who could have appealed.
 (5) Where under this Sanhita an appeal lies but an application for revision has been
 made to the High Court by any person and the High Court is satisfied that such application
 was made under the erroneous belief that no appeal lies thereto and that it is necessary in
 the interests of justice so to do, the High Court may treat the application for revision as a
 petition of appeal and deal with the same accordingly.
 443. (1) Whenever one or more persons convicted at the same trial makes or make
 application to a High Court for revision and any other person convicted at the same trial
 makes an application to the Sessions Judge for revision, the High Court shall decide,
 having regard to the general convenience of the parties and the importance of the questions
 involved, which of the two Courts should finally dispose of the applications for revision
 and when the High Court decides that all the applications for revision should be disposed
 of by itself, the High Court shall direct that the applications for revision pending before the
 Sessions Judge be transferred to itself and where the High Court decides that it is not
 necessary for it to dispose of the applications for revision, it shall direct that the applications
 for revision made to it be transferred to the Sessions Judge.
 (2) Whenever any application for revision is transferred to the High Court, that Court
 shall deal with the same as if it were an application duly made before itself.
 (3) Whenever any application for revision is transferred to the Sessions Judge, that
 Judge shall deal with the same as if it were an application duly made before himself.
 (4) Where an application for revision is transferred by the High Court to the Sessions
 Judge, no further application for revision shall lie to the High Court or to any other Court at
 the instance of the person or persons whose applications for revision have been disposed
 of by the Sessions Judge.
 444. Save as otherwise expressly provided by this Sanhita, no party has any right to
 be heard either personally or by an advocate before any Court exercising its powers of
 revision; but the Court may, if it thinks fit, when exercising such powers, hear any party
 either personally or by advocate.
 445. When the record of any trial held by a Magistrate is called for by the High Court
 or Court of Session under section 438, the Magistrate may submit with the record a statement
 setting forth the grounds of his decision or order and any facts which he thinks material to
 the issue, and that Court shall consider such statement before overruling or setting aside
 the said decision or order.
 446. When a case is revised under this Chapter by the High Court or a Sessions
 Judge, it or he shall, in the manner provided by section 429, certify its decision or order to
 the Court by which the finding, sentence or order revised was recorded or passed, and the
 Court to which the decision or order is so certified shall thereupon make such orders as are
 conformable to the decision so certified, and, if necessary, the record shall be amended in
 accordance therewith.
 High Court's
 powers of
 revision.
 Power of High
 Court to
 withdraw or
 transfer
 revision cases.
 Option of
 Court to hear
 parties.
 Statement by
 Magistrate of
 grounds of his
 decision to be
 considered by
 High Court.
 High Court's
 order to be
 certified to
 lower Court.
136
 CHAPTER XXXIII
 TRANSFER OF CRIMINAL CASES
 Power of
 Supreme Court
 to transfer
 cases and
 appeals.
 Power of High
 Court to
 transfer cases
 and appeals.
 447. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Supreme Court that an order under this
 section is expedient for the ends of justice, it may direct that any particular case or appeal be
 transferred from one High Court to another High Court or from a Criminal Court subordinate
 to one High Court to another Criminal Court of equal or superior jurisdiction subordinate to
 another High Court.
 (2) The Supreme Court may act under this section only on the application of the
 Attorney-General of India or of a party interested, and every such application shall be made
 by motion, which shall, except when the applicant is the Attorney-General of India or the
 Advocate-General of the State, be supported by affidavit or affirmation.
 (3) Where any application for the exercise of the powers conferred by this section is
 dismissed, the Supreme Court may, if it is of opinion that the application was frivolous or
 vexatious, order the applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person who has
 opposed the application such sum as it may consider appropriate in the circumstances of
 the case.
 448. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to the High Court—
 (a) that a fair and impartial inquiry or trial cannot be had in any Criminal Court
 subordinate thereto, or
 (b) that some question of law of unusual difficulty is likely to arise, or
 (c) that an order under this section is required by any provision of this Sanhita,
 or will tend to the general convenience of the parties or witnesses, or is expedient for
 the ends of justice,
 it may order—
 (i) that any offence be inquired into or tried by any Court not qualified under
 sections 197 to 205 (both inclusive), but in other respects competent to inquire into or
 try such offence;
 (ii) that any particular case or appeal, or class of cases or appeals, be transferred
 from a Criminal Court subordinate to its authority to any other such Criminal Court of
 equal or superior jurisdiction;
 (iii) that any particular case be committed for trial to a Court of Session; or
 (iv) that any particular case or appeal be transferred to and tried before itself.
 (2) The High Court may act either on the report of the lower Court, or on the application
 of a party interested, or on its own initiative:
 Provided that no application shall lie to the High Court for transferring a case from
 one Criminal Court to another Criminal Court in the same sessions division, unless an
 application for such transfer has been made to the Sessions Judge and rejected by him.
 (3) Every application for an order under sub-section (1) shall be made by motion,
 which shall, except when the applicant is the Advocate-General of the State, be supported
 by affidavit or affirmation.
 (4) When such application is made by an accused person, the High Court may direct
 him to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for the payment of any compensation which
 the High Court may award under sub-section (7).
 (5) Every accused person making such application shall give to the Public Prosecutor
 notice in writing of the application, together with a copy of the grounds on which it is made;
 and no order shall be made on the merits of the applications unless at least twenty-four
 hours have elapsed between the giving of such notice and the hearing of the application.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
137
 (6) Where the application is for the transfer of a case or appeal from any Subordinate
 Court, the High Court may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the interest of
 justice, order that, pending the disposal of the application the proceedings in the Subordinate
 Court shall be stayed, on such terms as the High Court may think fit to impose:
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 Provided that such stay shall not affect the Subordinate Court's power of remand
 under section 346.
 (7) Where an application for an order under sub-section (1) is dismissed, the High
 Court may, if it is of opinion that the application was frivolous or vexatious, order the
 applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person who has opposed the application
 such sum as it may consider proper in the circumstances of the case.
 (8) When the High Court orders under sub-section (1) that a case be transferred from
 any Court for trial before itself, it shall observe in such trial the same procedure which that
 Court would have observed if the case had not been so transferred.
 (9) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect any order of Government under
 section 218.
 449. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to a Sessions Judge that an order under this
 sub-section is expedient for the ends of justice, he may order that any particular case be
 transferred from one Criminal Court to another Criminal Court in his sessions division.
 (2) The Sessions Judge may act either on the report of the lower Court, or on the
 application of a party interested, or on his own initiative.
 (3) The provisions of sub-sections (3), (4), (5), (6), (7) and (9) of section 448 shall
 apply in relation to an application to the Sessions Judge for an order under sub-section (1)
 as they apply in relation to an application to the High Court for an order under
 sub-section (1) of section 448, except that sub-section (7) of that section shall so apply as
 if for the word "sum" occurring therein, the words "sum not exceeding ten thousand rupees"
 were substituted.
 450. (1) A Sessions Judge may withdraw any case or appeal from, or recall any case or
 appeal which he has made over to a Chief Judicial Magistrate subordinate to him.
 (2) At any time before the trial of the case or the hearing of the appeal has commenced
 before the Additional Sessions Judge, a Sessions Judge may recall any case or appeal
 which he has made over to any Additional Sessions Judge.
 (3) Where a Sessions Judge withdraws or recalls case or appeal under sub-section (1)
 or sub-section (2), he may either try the case in his own Court or hear the appeal himself, or
 make it over in accordance with the provisions of this Sanhita to another Court for trial or
 hearing, as the case may be.
 451. (1) Any Chief Judicial Magistrate may withdraw any case from, or recall any case
 which he has made over to, any Magistrate subordinate to him, and may inquire into or try
 such case himself, or refer it for inquiry or trial to any other such Magistrate competent to
 inquire into or try the same.
 (2) Any Judicial Magistrate may recall any case made over by him under
 sub-section (2) of section 213 to any other Magistrate and may inquire into or try such
 cases himself.
 452. Any District Magistrate or Sub-Divisional Magistrate may—
 (a) make over, for disposal, any proceeding which has been started before him,
 to any Magistrate subordinate to him;
 (b) withdraw any case from, or recall any case which he has made over to, any
 Magistrate subordinate to him, and dispose of such proceeding himself or refer it for
 disposal to any other Magistrate.
 Power of
 Sessions Judge
 to transfer
 cases and
 appeals.
 Withdrawal of
 cases and
 appeals by
 Session Judge.
 Withdrawal of
 cases by
 Judicial
 Magistrate.
 Making over
 or withdrawal
 of cases by
 Executive
 Magistrates