138
 Reasons to be
 recorded.
 Execution of
 order passed
 under section
 410.
 Execution of
 sentence of
 death passed
 by High Court.
 Postponement
 of execution
 of sentence of
 death in case
 of appeal to
 Supreme
 Court.
 Postponement
 of capital
 sentence on
 pregnant
 woman.
 Power to
 appoint place
 of
 imprisonment.
 453. A Sessions Judge or Magistrate making an order under section 450, section 451,
 section 452 or section 453 shall record his reasons for making it.
 CHAPTER XXXIV
 EXECUTION, SUSPENSION, REMISSION AND COMMUTATION OF SENTENCES
 A.—Death Sentences
 454. When in a case submitted to the High Court for the confirmation of a sentence of
 death, the Court of Session receives the order of confirmation or other order of the High
 Court thereon, it shall cause such order to be carried into effect by issuing a warrant or
 taking such other steps as may be necessary.
 455. When a sentence of death is passed by the High Court in appeal or in revision,
 the Court of Session shall, on receiving the order of the High Court, cause the sentence to
 be carried into effect by issuing a warrant.
 456. (1) Where a person is sentenced to death by the High Court and an appeal from
 its judgment lies to the Supreme Court under sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) of clause (1)
 of article 134 of the Constitution, the High Court shall order the execution of the sentence to
 be postponed until the period allowed for preferring such appeal has expired, or if, an appeal
 is preferred within that period, until such appeal is disposed of.
 (2) Where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, and the
 person sentenced makes an application to the High Court for the grant of a certificate under
 article 132 or under sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of article 134 of the Constitution, the High
 Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be postponed until such application is
 disposed of by the High Court, or if a certificate is granted on such application, until the
 period allowed for preferring an appeal to the Supreme Court on such certificate has expired.
 (3) Where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, and the High
 Court is satisfied that the person sentenced intends to present a petition to the Supreme
 Court for the grant of special leave to appeal under article 136 of the Constitution, the High
 Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be postponed for such period as it
 considers sufficient to enable him to present such petition.
 457. If a woman sentenced to death is found to be pregnant, the High Court shall
 commute the sentence to imprisonment for life.
 B.—Imprisonment
 458. (1) Except when otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force, the
 State Government may direct in what place any person liable to be imprisoned or committed
 to custody under this Sanhita shall be confined.
 (2) If any person liable to be imprisoned or committed to custody under this Sanhita
 is in confinement in a civil jail, the Court or Magistrate ordering the imprisonment or committal
 may direct that the person be removed to a criminal jail.
 (3) When a person is removed to a criminal jail under sub-section (2), he shall, on
 being released therefrom, be sent back to the civil jail, unless either—
 (a) three years have elapsed since he was removed to the criminal jail, in which
 case he shall be deemed to have been released from the civil jail under section 58 of
 the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; or
 (b) the Court which ordered his imprisonment in the civil jail has certified to the
 officer in charge of the criminal jail that he is entitled to be released under section 58
 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 5 of 1908.
 5 of 1908.
139
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 459. (1) Where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment for life or to imprisonment
 for a term in cases other than those provided for by section 455, the Court passing the
 sentence shall forthwith forward a warrant to the jail or other place in which he is, or is to be,
 confined, and, unless the accused is already confined in such jail or other place, shall
 forward him to such jail or other place, with the warrant:
 Provided that where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment till the rising of the
 Court, it shall not be necessary to prepare or forward a warrant to a jail, and the accused may
 be confined in such place as the Court may direct.
 (2) Where the accused is not present in Court when he is sentenced to such
 imprisonment as is mentioned in sub-section (1), the Court shall issue a warrant for his
 arrest for the purpose of forwarding him to the jail or other place in which he is to be
 confined; and in such case, the sentence shall commence on the date of his arrest.
 460. Every warrant for the execution of a sentence of imprisonment shall be directed
 to the officer in charge of the jail or other place in which the prisoner is, or is to be, confined.
 461. When the prisoner is to be confined in a jail, the warrant shall be lodged with the
 jailor.
 C.-Levy of fine
 462. (1) When an offender has been sentenced to pay a fine, but no such payment
 has been made, the Court passing the sentence may take action for the recovery of the fine
 in either or both of the following ways, that is to say, it may—
 (a) issue a warrant for the levy of the amount by attachment and sale of any
 movable property belonging to the offender;
 (b) issue a warrant to the Collector of the district, authorising him to realise the
 amount as arrears of land revenue from the movable or immovable property, or both,
 of the defaulter:
 Provided that, if the sentence directs that in default of payment of the fine, the
 offender shall be imprisoned, and if such offender has undergone the whole of such
 imprisonment in default, no Court shall issue such warrant unless, for special reasons to be
 recorded in writing, it considers it necessary so to do, or unless it has made an order for the
 payment of expenses or compensation out of the fine under section 395.
 (2) The State Government may make rules regulating the manner in which warrants
 under clause (a) of sub-section (1) are to be executed, and for the summary determination of
 any claims made by any person other than the offender in respect of any property attached
 in execution of such warrant.
 (3) Where the Court issues a warrant to the Collector under clause (b) of
 sub-section (1), the Collector shall realise the amount in accordance with the law relating to
 recovery of arrears of land revenue, as if such warrant were a certificate issued under such law:
 Provided that no such warrant shall be executed by the arrest or detention in prison of
 the offender.
 463. A warrant issued under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 462 by any Court
 may be executed within the local jurisdiction of such Court, and it shall authorise the
 attachment and sale of any such property outside such jurisdiction, when it is endorsed by
 the District Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction such property is found.
 464. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Sanhita or in any other law for the
 time being in force, when an offender has been sentenced to pay a fine by a Criminal Court
 in any territory to which this Sanhita does not extend and the Court passing the sentence
 issues a warrant to the Collector of a district in the territories to which this Sanhita extends,
 authorising him to realise the amount as if it were an arrear of land revenue, such warrant
 shall be deemed to be a warrant issued under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 462 by
 Execution of
 sentence of
 imprisonment.
 Direction of
 warrant for
 execution.
 Warrant with
 whom to be
 lodged.
 Warrant for
 levy of fine.
 Effect of such
 warrant.
 Warrant for
 levy of fine
 issued by a
 Court in any
 territory to
 which this
 Sanhita does
 not extend.
140
 a Court in the territories to which this Sanhita extends, and the provisions of sub-section (3)
 of the said section as to the execution of such warrant shall apply accordingly.
 Suspension of
 execution of
 sentence of
 imprisonment.
 Who may
 issue warrant.
 Sentence on
 escaped
 convict when
 to take effect.
 Sentence on
 offender
 already
 sentenced for
 another
 offence.
 465. (1) When an offender has been sentenced to fine only and to imprisonment in
 default of payment of the fine, and the fine is not paid forthwith, the Court may—
 (a) order that the fine shall be payable either in full on or before a date not more
 than thirty days from the date of the order, or in two or three installments, of which the
 first shall be payable on or before a date not more than thirty days from the date of the
 order and the other or others at an interval or at intervals, as the case may be, of not
 more than thirty days;
 (b) suspend the execution of the sentence of imprisonment and release the
 offender, on the execution by the offender of a bond, with or without sureties, as the
 Court thinks fit, conditioned for his appearance before the Court on the date or dates
 on or before which payment of the fine or the installments thereof, as the case may be,
 is to be made; and if the amount of the fine or of any installment, as the case may be,
 is not realised on or before the latest date on which it is payable under the order, the
 Court may direct the sentence of imprisonment to be carried into execution at once.
 (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall be applicable also in any case in which an
 order for the payment of money has been made on non-recovery of which imprisonment
 may be awarded and the money is not paid forthwith; and, if the person against whom the
 order has been made, on being required to enter into a bond such as is referred to in that
 sub-section, fails to do so, the Court may at once pass sentence of imprisonment.
 D.—General provisions regarding execution
 466. Every warrant for the execution of a sentence may be issued either by the Judge
 or Magistrate who passed the sentence, or by his successor-in-office.
 467. (1) When a sentence of death, imprisonment for life or fine is passed under this
 Sanhita on an escaped convict, such sentence shall, subject to the provisions hereinbefore
 contained, take effect immediately.
 (2) When a sentence of imprisonment for a term is passed under this Sanhita on an
 escaped convict,—
 (a) if such sentence is severer in kind than the sentence which such convict
 was undergoing when he escaped, the new sentence shall take effect immediately;
 (b) if such sentence is not severer in kind than the sentence which such convict
 was undergoing when he escaped, the new sentence shall take effect after he has
 suffered imprisonment for a further period equal to that which, at the time of his
 escape, remained unexpired of his former sentence.
 (3) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a sentence of rigorous imprisonment shall be
 deemed to be severer in kind than a sentence of simple imprisonment.
 468. (1) When a person already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment is sentenced
 on a subsequent conviction to imprisonment or imprisonment for life, such imprisonment or
 imprisonment for life shall commence at the expiration of the imprisonment to which he has
 been previously sentenced, unless the Court directs that the subsequent sentence shall
 run concurrently with such previous sentence:
 Provided that where a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment by an order
 under section 141 in default of furnishing security is, whilst undergoing such sentence,
 sentenced to imprisonment for an offence committed prior to the making of such order, the
 latter sentence shall commence immediately.
 (2) When a person already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for life is sentenced
 on a subsequent conviction to imprisonment for a term or imprisonment for life, the
 subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with such previous sentence.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
141
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 469. Where an accused person has, on conviction, been sentenced to imprisonment
 for a term, not being imprisonment in default of payment of fine, the period of detention, if
 any, undergone by him during the investigation, inquiry or trial of the same case and before
 the date of such conviction, shall be set off against the term of imprisonment imposed on
 him on such conviction, and the liability of such person to undergo imprisonment on such
 conviction shall be restricted to the remainder, if any, of the term of imprisonment imposed
 on him:
 Provided that in cases referred to in section 476, such period of detention shall be set
 off against the period of fourteen years referred to in that section.
 470. (1) Nothing in section 467 or section 468 shall be held to excuse any person from
 any part of the punishment to which he is liable upon his former or subsequent conviction.
 (2) When an award of imprisonment in default of payment of a fine is annexed to a
 substantive sentence of imprisonment and the person undergoing the sentence is after its
 execution to undergo a further substantive sentence or further substantive sentences of
 imprisonment, effect shall not be given to the award of imprisonment in default of payment
 of the fine until the person has undergone the further sentence or sentences.
 471. When a sentence has been fully executed, the officer executing it shall return the
 warrant to the Court from which it is issued, with an endorsement under his hand certifying
 the manner in which the sentence has been executed.
 472. Any money (other than a fine) payable by virtue of any order made under this
 Sanhita, and the method of recovery of which is not otherwise expressly provided for, shall
 be recoverable as if it were a fine:
 Provided that section 462 shall, in its application to an order under section 400, by
 virtue of this section, be construed as if in the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 462,
 after the words and figures "under section 395", the words and figures "or an order for
 payment of costs under section 401" had been inserted.
 473. (1) A convict under the sentence of death or his legal heir or any other relative
 may, if he has not already submitted a petition for mercy, file a mercy petition before the
 President of India under article 72 or the Governor of the State under article 161 of the
 Constitution within a period of thirty days after the date on which the Superintendent of the
 Jail,—
 (i) informs him about the dismissal of the appeal or special leave to appeal by
 the Supreme Court; or
 (ii) informs him about the date of confirmation of the sentence of death by the
 High Court and the time allowed to file an appeal or special leave in the Supreme Court
 has expired,
 and that may present the mercy petition to the Home Department of the State Government
 or the Central Government, as the case may be.
 (2) The petition under sub-section (1) may, initially be made to the Governor and on
 its rejection or disposal by the Governor, the petition shall be made to the President within
 a period of sixty days from the date of rejection or disposal of his petition.
 (3) The Superintendent of the Jail or officer in charge of the Jail shall ensure, that
 every convict, in case there are more than one convict in a case, also makes the mercy
 petition within a period of sixty days and on non-receipt of such petition from the other
 convicts, Superintendent of the Jail shall send the names, addresses, copy of the record of
 the case and all other details of the case to the Central Government or State Government for
 consideration along with the said mercy petition.
 (4) The Central Government shall, on receipt of the mercy petition seek the comments
 of the State Government and consider the petition along with the records of the case and
 Period of
 detention
 undergone by
 accused to be
 set off against
 sentence
 of
 imprisonment.
 Saving.
 Return of
 warrant on
 execution of
 sentence.
 Money
 ordered to be
 paid
 recoverable as
 a fine.
 Mercy
 Petition in
 death sentence
 cases.
142
 make recommendations to the President in this behalf, as expeditiously as possible, within
 a period of sixty days from the date of receipt of comments of the State Government and
 records from Superintendent of the Jail.
 (5) The President may, consider, decide and dispose of the mercy petition and, in case
 there are more than one convict in a case, the petitions shall be decided by the President
 together in the interests of justice.
 (6) Upon receipt of the order of the President on the mercy petition, the Central
 Government shall within forty-eight hours, communicate the same to the Home Department
 of the State Governnment and the Superintendent of the Jail or officer in charge of the Jail.
 (7) No appeal shall lie in any Court against the order of the President made under
 article 72 of the Constitution and it shall be final, and any question as to the arriving of the
 decision by the President shall not be enquired into in any Court.
 Power to
 suspend or
 remit
 sentences.
 474. (1) When any person has been sentenced to punishment for an offence, the
 appropriate Government may, at any time, without conditions or upon any conditions which
 the person sentenced accepts, suspend the execution of his sentence or remit the whole or
 any part of the punishment to which he has been sentenced.
 (2) Whenever an application is made to the appropriate Government for the suspension
 or remission of a sentence, the appropriate Government may require the presiding Judge of
 the Court before or by which the conviction was had or confirmed, to state his opinion as to
 whether the application should be granted or refused, together with his reasons for such
 opinion and also to forward with the statement of such opinion a certified copy of the
 record of the trial or of such record thereof as exists.
 (3) If any condition on which a sentence has been suspended or remitted is, in the
 opinion of the appropriate Government, not fulfilled, the appropriate Government may cancel
 the suspension or remission, and thereupon the person in whose favour the sentence has
 been suspended or remitted may, if at large, be arrested by any police officer, without
 warrant and remanded to undergo the unexpired portion of the sentence.
 (4) The condition on which a sentence is suspended or remitted under this section
 may be one to be fulfilled by the person in whose favour the sentence is suspended or
 remitted, or one independent of his will.
 (5) The appropriate Government may, by general rules or special orders, give directions
 as to the suspension of sentences and the conditions on which petitions should be presented
 and dealt with:
 Provided that in the case of any sentence (other than a sentence of fine) passed on a
 person above the age of eighteen years, no such petition by the person sentenced or by
 any other person on his behalf shall be entertained, unless the person sentenced is in jail,
 and—
 (a) where such petition is made by the person sentenced, it is presented through
 the officer in charge of the jail; or
 (b) where such petition is made by any other person, it contains a declaration
 that the person sentenced is in jail.
 (6) The provisions of the above sub-sections shall also apply to any order passed by
 a Criminal Court under any section of this Sanhita or of any other law, which restricts the
 liberty of any person or imposes any liability upon him or his property.
 (7) In this section and in section 475, the expression "appropriate Government"
 means,—
 (a) in cases where the sentence is for an offence against, or the order referred to
 in sub-section (6) is passed under, any law relating to a matter to which the executive
 power of the Union extends, the Central Government;
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
143
 (b) in other cases, the Government of the State within which the offender is
 sentenced or the said order is passed.
 475. The appropriate Government may, without the consent of the person sentenced,
 commute—
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 (a) a sentence of death, for imprisonment for life;
 (b) a sentence of imprisonment for life, for imprisonment for a term not less than
 seven years;
 (c) a sentence of imprisonment for seven years or ten years, for imprisonment
 for a term not less than three years;
 (d) a sentence of rigorous imprisonment, for simple imprisonment for any term
 to which that person might have been sentenced;
 (e) a sentence of imprisonment up to three years, for fine.
 476. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 474, where a sentence of
 imprisonment for life is imposed on conviction of a person for an offence for which death is
 one of the punishments provided by law, or where a sentence of death imposed on a person
 has been commuted under section 475 into one of imprisonment for life, such person shall
 not be released from prison unless he had served at least fourteen years of imprisonment.
 477. The powers conferred by sections 474 and 475 upon the State Government may,
 in the case of sentences of death, also be exercised by the Central Government.
 478. (1) The powers conferred by sections 474 and 475 upon the State Government to
 remit or commute a sentence, in any case where the sentence is for an offence—
 (a) which was investigated by any agency empowered to make investigation
 into an offence under any Central Act other than this Sanhita; or
 (b) which involved the misappropriation or destruction of, or damage to, any
 property belonging to the Central Government; or
 (c) which was committed by a person in the service of the Central Government
 while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty,
 shall not be exercised by the State Government except after concurrence with the Central
 Government.
 (2) No order of suspension, remission or commutation of sentences passed by the State
 Government in relation to a person, who has been convicted of offences, some of which relate to
 matters to which the executive power of the Union extends, and who has been sentenced to
 separate terms of imprisonment which are to run concurrently, shall have effect unless an order
 for the suspension, remission or commutation, as the case may be, of such sentences has also
 been made by the Central Government in relation to the offences committed by such person
 with regard to matters to which the executive power of the Union extends.
 CHAPTER XXXV
 PROVISIONS AS TO BAIL AND BONDS
 479. In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 (a) "bail" means release of a person accused of an offence from the custody of
 law upon certain conditions imposed by an officer or court including execution by
 such person of a bond or a bail bond.
 Power to
 commute
 sentence.
 Restriction on
 powers of
 remission or
 commutation
 in certain
 cases.
 Concurrent
 power of
 Central
 Government
 in case of
 death
 sentences.
 State
 Government
 to act after
 concurrence
 with Central
 Government
 in certain
 cases.
 Bail and bond.
144
 (b) "bond" means a personal bond or an undertaking for release without payment
 of any surety;
 (c) "bail bond" means an undertaking for release with payment of surety.
 In what cases
 bail to be
 taken.
 Maximum
 period for
 which
 undertrial
 prisoner can
 be detained.
 480. (1) When any person other than a person accused of a non-bailable offence is
 arrested without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station, or appears or is brought
 before a Court, and is prepared at any time while in the custody of such officer or at any
 stage of the proceeding before such Court to give bail, such person shall be released on
 bail:
 Provided that such officer or Court, if he or it thinks fit, may, and shall, if such person
 is indigent and is unable to furnish surety, instead of taking bail bond from such person,
 discharge him on his executing a bond for his appearance as hereinafter provided.
 Explanation.—Where a person is unable to give bail bond within a week of the date
 of his arrest, it shall be a sufficient ground for the officer or the Court to presume that he is
 an indigent person for the purposes of this proviso:
 Provided further that nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the provisions
 of sub-section (3) of section 135 or section 494.
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a person has failed
 to comply with the conditions of the bail bond as regards the time and place of attendance,
 the Court may refuse to release him on bail, when on a subsequent occasion in the same
 case he appears before the Court or is brought in custody and any such refusal shall be
 without prejudice to the powers of the Court to call upon any person bound by such bond
 to pay the penalty thereof under section 493.
 481. (1) Where a person has, during the period of investigation, inquiry or trial under
 this Sanhita of an offence under any law (not being an offence for which the punishment of
 death or life imprisonment has been specified as one of the punishments under that law)
 undergone detention for a period extending up to one-half of the maximum period of
 imprisonment specified for that offence under that law, he shall be released by the Court on
 bail:
 Provided that where such person is a first-time offender (who has never been convicted
 of any offence in the past) he shall be released on bail by the Court, if he has undergone
 detention for the period extending up to one-third of the maximum period of imprisonment
 specified for such offence under that law:
 Provided further that the Court may, after hearing the Public Prosecutor and for
 reasons to be recorded by it in writing, order the continued detention of such person for a
 period longer than one-half of the said period or release him on bail bond instead of the
 personal bond:
 Provided further that no such person shall in any case be detained during the period
 of investigation, inquiry or trial for more than the maximum period of imprisonment provided
 for the said offence under that law.
 Explanation.—In computing the period of detention under this section for granting
 bail, the period of detention passed due to delay in proceeding caused by the accused shall
 be excluded.
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an investigation,
 inquiry or trial in more than one offence or in multiple cases are pending against a person,
 he shall not be released on bail by the Court.
 (3) The Superintendent of jail, where the accused person is detained, on completion
 of one-half or one-third of the period mentioned in sub-section (1), as the case may be, shall
 forthwith make an application in writing to the Court to proceed under sub-section (1) for
 the release of such person on bail.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
145
 482. (1) When any person accused of, or suspected of, the commission of any
 non-bailable offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a
 police station or appears or is brought before a Court other than the High Court or Court of
 session, he may be released on bail, but—
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (i) such person shall not be so released if there appear reasonable grounds for
 believing that he has been guilty of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment
 for life;
 (ii) such person shall not be so released if such offence is a cognizable offence
 and he had been previously convicted of an offence punishable with death,
 imprisonment for life or imprisonment for seven years or more, or he had been
 previously convicted on two or more occasions of a cognizable offence punishable
 with imprisonment for three years or more but less than seven years:
 Provided that the Court may direct that a person referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii)
 be released on bail if such person is under the age of eighteen years or is a woman or is sick
 or infirm:
 Provided further that the Court may also direct that a person referred to in clause (ii)
 be released on bail if it is satisfied that it is just and proper so to do for any other special
 reason:
 Provided also that the mere fact that an accused person may be required for being
 identified by witnesses during investigation shall not be sufficient ground for refusing to
 grant bail if he is otherwise entitled to be released on bail and gives an undertaking that he
 shall comply with such directions as may be given by the Court:
 Provided also that no person shall, if the offence alleged to have been committed by
 him is punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for seven years or
 more, be released on bail by the Court under this sub-section without giving an opportunity
 of hearing to the Public Prosecutor.
 (2) If it appears to such officer or Court at any stage of the investigation, inquiry or
 trial, as the case may be, that there are not reasonable grounds for believing that the
 accused has committed a non-bailable offence, but that there are sufficient grounds for
 further inquiry into his guilt, the accused shall, subject to the provisions of section 494 and
 pending such inquiry, be released on bail, or, at the discretion of such officer or Court, on
 the execution by him of a bond without sureties for his appearance as hereinafter provided.
 (3) When a person accused or suspected of the commission of an offence punishable
 with imprisonment which may extend to seven years or more or of an offence under
 Chapter VI, Chapter XVI or Chapter XVII of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 or
 abatement of, or conspiracy or attempt to commit, any such offence, is released on bail
 under sub-section (1), the Court shall impose the conditions,—
 (a) that such person shall attend in accordance with the conditions of the bond
 executed under this Chapter;
 (b) that such person shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of which
 he is accused, or suspected, of the commission of which he is suspected; and
 (c) that such person shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat
 or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
 from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer or tamper with the
 evidence,
 and may also impose, in the interests of justice, such other conditions as it considers
 necessary.
 (4) An officer or a Court releasing any person on bail under sub-section (1) or
 sub-section (2), shall record in writing his or its reasons or special reasons for so doing.
 When bail
 may be taken
 in case of
 non-bailable
 offence.
146
 (5) Any Court which has released a person on bail under sub-section (1) or
 sub-section (2), may, if it considers it necessary so to do, direct that such person be
 arrested and commit him to custody.
 (6) If, in any case triable by a Magistrate, the trial of a person accused of any
 non-bailable offence is not concluded within a period of sixty days from the first date fixed
 for taking evidence in the case, such person shall, if he is in custody during the whole of the
 said period, be released on bail to the satisfaction of the Magistrate, unless for reasons to
 be recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise directs.
 (7) If, at any time, after the conclusion of the trial of a person accused of a
 non-bailable offence and before judgment is delivered, the Court is of opinion that there are
 reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not guilty of any such offence, it shall
 release the accused, if he is in custody, on the execution by him of a bond without sureties
 for his appearance to hear judgment delivered.
 Bail to require
 accused to
 appear before
 next Appellate
 Court.
 Direction for
 grant of bail
 to person
 apprehending
 arrest.
 Special powers
 of High Court
 or Court of
 Session
 regarding bail.
 483. (1) Before conclusion of the trial and before disposal of the appeal, the Court
 trying the offence or the Appellate Court, as the case may be, shall require the accused to
 execute bond or bail bond, to appear before the higher Court as and when such Court issues
 notice in respect of any appeal or petition filed against the judgment of the respective Court
 and such bond shall be in force for six months.
 (2) If such accused fails to appear, the bond stand forfeited and the procedure under
 section 493 shall apply.
 484. (1) When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on an
 accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or
 the Court of Session for a direction under this section; and that Court may, if it thinks fit,
 direct that in the event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail.
 (2) When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a direction under
 sub-section (1), it may include such conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of
 the particular case, as it may think fit, including—
 (i) a condition that the person shall make himself available for interrogation by
 a police officer as and when required;
 (ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or indirectly, make any
 inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so
 as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer;
 (iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India without the previous
 permission of the Court;
 (iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub-section (3) of
 section 482, as if the bail were granted under that section.
 (3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an officer in charge of a
 police station on such accusation, and is prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time
 while in the custody of such officer to give bail, he shall be released on bail; and if a
 Magistrate taking cognizance of such offence decides that a warrant should be issued in
 the first instance against that person, he shall issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the
 direction of the Court under sub-section (1).
 (4) Nothing in this section shall apply to any case involving the arrest of any person
 on accusation of having committed an offence under sub-section (2) of section 64 or
 section 66 or section 70 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 485. (1) A High Court or Court of Session may direct,—
 (a) that any person accused of an offence and in custody be released on bail,
 and if the offence is of the nature specified in sub-section (3) of section 482, may
 impose any condition which it considers necessary for the purposes mentioned in
 that sub-section;
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
147
 (b) that any condition imposed by a Magistrate when releasing any person on
 bail be set aside or modified:
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 Provided that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting bail to a
 person who is accused of an offence which is triable exclusively by the Court of Session or
 which, though not so triable, is punishable with imprisonment for life, give notice of the
 application for bail to the Public Prosecutor unless it is, for reasons to be recorded in
 writing, of opinion that it is not practicable to give such notice:
 Provided further that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting
 bail to a person who is accused of an offence triable under section 64 or section 70 of the
 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, give notice of the application for bail to the Public Prosecutor
 within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the notice of such application.
 (1A) The presence of the informant or any person authorised by him shall be obligatory
 at the time of hearing of the application for bail to the person under section 64 or section 66
 or section 70 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 (2) A High Court or Court of Session may direct that any person who has been
 released on bail under this Chapter be arrested and commit him to custody.
 486. (1) The amount of every bond executed under this Chapter shall be fixed with
 due regard to the circumstances of the case and shall not be excessive.
 (2) The High Court or the Court of Session may direct that the bail required by a police
 officer or Magistrate be reduced.
 487. (1) Before any person is released on bail or released on his own bond, a bond for
 such sum of money as the police officer or Court, as the case may be, thinks sufficient shall
 be executed by such person, and, when he is released on bail, by one or more sufficient
 sureties conditioned that such person shall attend at the time and place mentioned in the
 bond, and shall continue so to attend until otherwise directed by the police officer or Court,
 as the case may be.
 (2) Where any condition is imposed for the release of any person on bail, the bond
 shall also contain that condition.
 (3) If the case so requires, the bond shall also bind the person released on bail to
 appear when called upon at the High Court, Court of Session or other Court to answer the
 charge.
 (4) For the purpose of determining whether the sureties are fit or sufficient, the Court
 may accept affidavits in proof of the facts contained therein relating to the sufficiency or
 fitness of the sureties, or, if it considers necessary, may either hold an enquiry itself or cause
 an inquiry to be made by a Magistrate subordinate to the Court, as to such sufficiency or
 fitness.
 488. Every person standing surety to an accused person for his release on bail, shall
 make a declaration before the Court as to the number of persons to whom he has stood
 surety including the accused, giving therein all the relevant particulars.
 489. (1) As soon as the bond has been executed, the person for whose appearance it
 has been executed shall be released; and, when he is in jail, the court admitting him to bail
 shall issue an order of release to the officer in charge of the jail, and such officer on receipt
 of the orders shall release him.
 (2) Nothing in this section, section 480 or section 482, shall be deemed to require the
 release of any person liable to be detained for some matter other than that in respect of
 which the bond was executed.
 Amount of
 bond and
 reduction
 thereof.
 Bond of
 accused and
 sureties.
 Declaration by
 sureties.
 Discharge
 from custody.
148
 Power to
 order
 sufficient bail
 when that first
 taken is
 insufficient.
 Discharge of
 sureties.
 Deposit
 instead of
 recognizance.
 Procedure
 when bond has
 been forfeited.
 490. If, through mistake, fraud or otherwise, insufficient sureties have been accepted,
 or if they afterwards become insufficient, the Court may issue a warrant of arrest directing
 that the person released on bail be brought before it and may order him to find sufficient
 sureties, and, on his failing so to do, may commit him to jail.
 491. (1) All or any sureties for the attendance and appearance of a person released on
 bail may at any time apply to a Magistrate to discharge the bond, either wholly or so far as
 relates to the applicants.
 (2) On such application being made, the Magistrate shall issue his warrant of arrest
 directing that the person so released be brought before him.
 (3) On the appearance of such person pursuant to the warrant, or on his voluntary
 surrender, the Magistrate shall direct the bond to be discharged either wholly or so far as
 relates to the applicants, and shall call upon such person to find other sufficient sureties,
 and, if he fails to do so, may commit him to jail.
 492. When any person is required by any Court or officer to execute a bond with or
 without sureties, such Court or officer may, except in the case of a bond for good behaviour,
 permit him to deposit a sum of money or Government promissory notes to such amount as
 the Court or officer may fix in lieu of executing such bond.
 493. (1) Where a bond under this Sanhita is for appearance, or for production of
 property, before a Court and it is proved to the satisfaction of that Court, or of any Court to
 which the case has subsequently been transferred, that the bond has been forfeited,
 or where, in respect of any other bond under this Sanhita, it is proved to the satisfaction of
 the Court by which the bond was taken, or of any Court to which the case has subsequently
 been transferred, or of the Court of any Magistrate of the first class, that the bond has been
 forfeited,
 the Court shall record the grounds of such proof, and may call upon any person bound by
 such bond to pay the penalty thereof or to show cause why it should not be paid.
 Explanation.—A condition in a bond for appearance, or for production of property,
 before a Court shall be construed as including a condition for appearance, or as the case
 may be, for production of property, before any Court to which the case may subsequently
 be transferred.
 (2) If sufficient cause is not shown and the penalty is not paid, the Court may proceed
 to recover the same as if such penalty were a fine imposed by it under this Sanhita:
 Provided that where such penalty is not paid and cannot be recovered in the manner
 aforesaid, the person so bound as surety shall be liable, by order of the Court ordering the
 recovery of the penalty, to imprisonment in civil jail for a term which may extend to six
 months.
 (3) The Court may, after recording its reasons for doing so, remit any portion of the
 penalty mentioned and enforce payment in part only.
 (4) Where a surety to a bond dies before the bond is forfeited, his estate shall be
 discharged from all liability in respect of the bond.
 (5) Where any person who has furnished security under section 125 or section 136 or
 section 401 is convicted of an offence the commission of which constitutes a breach of the
 conditions of his bond, or of a bond executed in lieu of his bond under section 496, a
 certified copy of the judgment of the Court by which he was convicted of such offence may
 be used as evidence in proceedings under this section against his surety or sureties, and,
 if such certified copy is so used, the Court shall presume that such offence was committed
 by him unless the contrary is proved.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
149
 494. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 493, where a bond under this
 Sanhita is for appearance of a person in a case and it is forfeited for breach of a condition,—
 (a) the bond executed by such person as well as the bond, if any, executed by
 one or more of his sureties in that case shall stand cancelled; and
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (b) thereafter no such person shall be released only on his own bond in that
 case, if the Police Officer or the Court, as the case may be, for appearance before
 whom the bond was executed, is satisfied that there was no sufficient cause for the
 failure of the person bound by the bond to comply with its condition:
 Provided that subject to any other provisions of this Sanhita he may be released in
 that case upon the execution of a fresh personal bond for such sum of money and bond by
 one or more of such sureties as the police officer or the Court, as the case may be, thinks
 sufficient.
 495. When any surety to a bond under this Sanhita becomes insolvent or dies, or
 when any bond is forfeited under the provisions of section 493, the Court by whose order
 such bond was taken, or a Magistrate of the first class may order the person from whom
 such security was demanded to furnish fresh securities in accordance with the directions of
 the original order, and if such security is not furnished, such Court or Magistrate may
 proceed as if there had been a default in complying with such original order.
 496. When the person required by any Court, or officer to execute a bond is a minor,
 such Court or officer may accept, in lieu thereof, a bond executed by a surety or sureties
 only.
 497. All orders passed under section 493 shall be appealable,—
 (i) in the case of an order made by a Magistrate, to the Sessions Judge;
 (ii) in the case of an order made by a Court of Session, to the Court to which an
 appeal lies from an order made by such Court.
 498. The High Court or Court of Sessions may direct any Magistrate to levy the
 amount due on a bond for appearance or attendance at such High Court or Court of Session.
 CHAPTER XXXVI
 DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY
 499. When any property is produced before any Criminal Court or the Magistrate
 empowered to take cognizance or commit the case for trial during any investigation, inquiry
 or trial, the Court or the Magistrate may make such order as it thinks fit for the proper
 custody of such property pending the conclusion of the investigation, inquiry or trial, and,
 if the property is subject to speedy and natural decay, or if it is otherwise expedient so to do,
 the Court or the Magistrate may, after recording such evidence as it thinks necessary, order
 it to be sold or otherwise disposed of.
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "property" includes—
 (a) property of any kind or document which is produced before the Court or
 which is in its custody;
 (b) any property regarding which an offence appears to have been committed
 or which appears to have been used for the commission of any offence.
 (2) The Court or the Magistrate shall, within a period of fourteen days from the
 production of the property referred to in sub-section (1) before it, prepare a statement of
 such property containing its description in such form and manner as the State Government
 may, by rules, provide.
 (3) The Court or the Magistrate shall cause to be taken the photograph and if necessary,
 videograph on mobile phone or any electronic media, of the property referred to in
 sub-section (1).
 Cancellation
 of bond and
 bail bond.
 Procedure in
 case of
 insolvency or
 death of
 surety or when
 a bond is
 forfeited.
 Bond required
 from minor.
 Appeal from
 orders under
 section 446.
 Power to
 direct levy of
 amount due on
 certain
 recognizances.
 Order for
 custody and
 disposal of
 property
 pending trial
 in certain
 cases.
150
 (4) The statement prepared under sub-section (2) and the photograph or the
 videography taken under sub-section (3) shall be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or
 other proceeding under the Sanhita.
 (5) The Court or the Magistrate shall, within a period of thirty days after the statement
 has been prepared under sub-section (2) and the photograph or the videography has been
 taken under sub-section (3), order the disposal, destruction, confiscation or delivery of the
 property in the manner specified hereinafter.
 Order for
 disposal of
 property at
 conclusion of
 trial.
 Payment to
 innocent
 purchaser of
 money found
 on accused.
 Appeal against
 orders under
 section 500 or
 section 501.
 Destruction of
 libellous and
 other matter.
 500. (1) When an investigation, inquiry or trial in any Criminal Court is concluded, the
 Court or the Magistrate may make such order as it thinks fit for the disposal, by destruction,
 confiscation or delivery to any person claiming to be entitled to possession thereof or
 otherwise, of any property or document produced before it or in its custody, or regarding
 which any offence appears to have been committed, or which has been used for the
 commission of any offence.
 (2) An order may be made under sub-section (1) for the delivery of any property to
 any person claiming to be entitled to the possession thereof, without any condition or on
 condition that he executes a bond, with or without securities, to the satisfaction of the
 Court or the Magistrate, engaging to restore such property to the Court if the order made
 under sub-section (1) is modified or set aside on appeal or revision.
 (3) A Court of Session may, instead of itself making an order under sub-section (1),
 direct the property to be delivered to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, who shall thereupon
 deal with it in the manner provided in sections 505, 506 and 507.
 (4) Except where the property is livestock or is subject to speedy and natural decay,
 or where a bond has been executed in pursuance of sub-section (2), an order made under
 sub-section (1) shall not be carried out for two months, or when an appeal is presented,
 until such appeal has been disposed of.
 (5) In this section, the term "property" includes, in the case of property regarding
 which an offence appears to have been committed, not only such property as has been
 originally in the possession or under the control of any party, but also any property into or
 for which the same may have been converted or exchanged, and anything acquired by such
 conversion or exchange, whether immediately or otherwise.
 501. When any person is convicted of any offence which includes, or amounts to,
 theft or receiving stolen property, and it is proved that any other person bought the stolen
 property from him without knowing or having reason to believe that the same was stolen,
 and that any money has on his arrest been taken out of the possession of the convicted
 person, the Court may, on the application of such purchaser and on the restitution of the
 stolen property to the person entitled to the possession thereof, order that out of such
 money a sum not exceeding the price paid by such purchaser be delivered to him within six
 months from the date of such order.
 502. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by a Court under section 500 or
 section 501, may appeal against it to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from convictions
 by the former Court.
 (2) On such appeal, the Appellate Court may direct the order to be stayed pending
 disposal of the appeal, or may modify, alter or annul the order and make any further orders
 that may be just.
 (3) The powers referred to in sub-section (2) may also be exercised by a Court of
 appeal, confirmation or revision while dealing with the case in which the order referred to in
 sub-section (1) was made.
 503. (1) On a conviction under section 292, section 293, section 354 of the Bhartiya
 Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the Court may order the destruction of all the copies of the thing in
 respect of which the conviction was had, and which are in the custody of the Court or
 remain in the possession or power of the person convicted.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
