151
 (2) The Court may, in like manner, on a conviction under section 272, section 273,
 section 274 or section 275 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, order the food, drink, drug
 or medical preparation in respect of which the conviction was had, to be destroyed.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 504. (1) When a person is convicted of an offence by use of criminal force or show of
 force or by criminal intimidation, and it appears to the Court that, by such use of force or
 show of force or intimidation, any person has been dispossessed of any immovable property,
 the Court may, if it thinks fit, order that possession of the same be restored to that person
 after evicting by force, if necessary, any other person who may be in possession of the
 property:
 Provided that no such order shall be made by the Court more than one month after the
 date of the conviction.
 (2) Where the Court trying the offence has not made an order under sub-section (1),
 the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision may, if it thinks fit, make such order while
 disposing of the appeal, reference or revision, as the case may be.
 (3) Where an order has been made under sub-section (1), the provisions of
 section 502 shall apply in relation thereto as they apply in relation to an order under section 501.
 (4) No order made under this section shall prejudice any right or interest to or in such
 immovable property which any person may be able to establish in a civil suit.
 505. (1) Whenever the seizure of property by any police officer is reported to a
 Magistrate under the provisions of this Sanhita, and such property is not produced before
 a Criminal Court during an inquiry or trial, the Magistrate may make such order as he thinks
 fit respecting the disposal of such property or the delivery of such property to the person
 entitled to the possession thereof, or if such person cannot be ascertained, respecting the
 custody and production of such property.
 (2) If the person so entitled is known, the Magistrate may order the property to be
 delivered to him on such conditions (if any) as the Magistrate thinks fit and if such person
 is unknown, the Magistrate may detain it and shall, in such case, issue a proclamation
 specifying the articles of which such property consists, and requiring any person who may
 have a claim thereto, to appear before him and establish his claim within six months from the
 date of such proclamation.
 506. (1) If no person within such period establishes his claim to such property, and if
 the person in whose possession such property was found is unable to show that it was
 legally acquired by him, the Magistrate may by order direct that such property shall be at
 the disposal of the State Government and may be sold by that Government and the proceeds
 of such sale shall be dealt with in such manner as the State Government may, by rules,
 provide.
 (2) An appeal shall lie against any such order to the Court to which appeals ordinarily
 lie from convictions by the Magistrate.
 507. If the person entitled to the possession of such property is unknown or absent
 and the property is subject to speedy and natural decay, or if the Magistrate to whom its
 seizure is reported is of opinion that its sale would be for the benefit of the owner, or that the
 value of such property is less than ten thousand rupees, the Magistrate may at any time
 direct it to be sold; and the provisions of sections 505 and 506 shall, as nearly as may be
 practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale.
 CHAPTER XXXVII
 IRREGULAR PROCEEDINGS
 508. If any Magistrate not empowered by law to do any of the following things,
 namely:—
 (a) to issue a search-warrant under section 97;
 Power to
 restore
 possession of
 immovable
 property.
 Procedure by
 police upon
 seizure of
 property.
 Procedure
 where no
 claimant
 appears within
 six months.
 Power to sell
 perishable
 property.
 Irregularities
 which do not
 vitiate
 proceedings.
 50
 (b) to order, under section 174, the police to investigate an offence;
152
 (c) to hold an inquest under section 196;
 (d) to issue process under section 207, for the apprehension of a person within
 his local jurisdiction who has committed an offence outside the limits of such
 jurisdiction;
 (e) to take cognizance of an offence under clause (a) or clause (b) of
 sub-section (1) of section 210;
 (f) to make over a case under sub-section (2) of section 212;
 (g) to tender a pardon under section 343;
 (h) to recall a case and try it himself under section 451; or
 (i) to sell property under section 506 or section 507,
 erroneously in good faith does that thing, his proceedings shall not be set aside merely on
 the ground of his not being so empowered.
 Irregularities
 which vitiate
 proceedings.
 Proceedings in
 wrong place.
 509. If any Magistrate, not being empowered by law in this behalf, does any of the
 following things, namely:—
 (a) attaches and sells property under section 85;
 (b) issues a search-warrant for a document, parcel or other things in the custody
 of a postal or telegraph authority;
 (c) demands security to keep the peace;
 (d) demands security for good behaviour;
 (e) discharges a person lawfully bound to be of good behaviour;
 (f) cancels a bond to keep the peace;
 (g) makes an order for maintenance;
 (h) makes an order under section 152 as to a local nuisance;
 (i) prohibits, under section 162, the repetition or continuance of a public
 nuisance;
 (j) makes an order under Part C or Part D of Chapter XI;
 (k) takes cognizance of an offence under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
 section 210;
 (l) tries an offender;
 (m) tries an offender summarily;
 (n) passes a sentence, under section 364, on proceedings recorded by another
 Magistrate;
 (o) decides an appeal;
 (p) calls, under section 438, for proceedings; or
 (q) revises an order passed under section 493,
 his proceedings shall be void.
 510. No finding, sentence or order of any Criminal Court shall be set aside merely on
 the ground that the inquiry, trial or other proceedings in the course of which it was arrived
 at or passed, took place in a wrong sessions division, district, sub-division or other local
 area, unless it appears that such error has in fact occasioned a failure of justice.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
153
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 511. (1) If any Court before which a confession or other statement of an accused
 person recorded, or purporting to be recorded under section 183 or section 316, is tendered,
 or has been received, in evidence finds that any of the provisions of either of such sections
 have not been complied with by the Magistrate recording the statement, it may,
 notwithstanding anything contained in section 94 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adiniyam 2023,
 take evidence in regard to such non-compliance, and may, if satisfied that such
 non-compliance has not injured the accused in his defence on the merits and that he duly
 made the statement recorded, admit such statement.
 (2) The provisions of this section apply to Courts of appeal, reference and revision.
 512. (1) No finding, sentence or order by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be
 deemed invalid merely on the ground that no charge was framed or on the ground of any
 error, omission or irregularity in the charge including any misjoinder of charges, unless, in
 the opinion of the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, a failure of justice has in fact
 been occasioned thereby.
 (2) If the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, is of opinion that a failure of justice
 has in fact been occasioned, it may,—
 (a) in the case of an omission to frame a charge, order that a charge be framed,
 and that the trial be recommended from the point immediately after the framing of the
 charge;
 (b) in the case of an error, omission or irregularity in the charge, direct a new trial
 to be had upon a charge framed in whatever manner it thinks fit:
 Provided that if the Court is of opinion that the facts of the case are such that no valid
 charge could be preferred against the accused in respect of the facts proved, it shall quash
 the conviction.
 513. (1) Subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained, no finding, sentence or
 order passed by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be reversed or altered by a Court of
 appeal, confirmation of revision on account of any error, omission or irregularity in the
 complaint, summons, warrant, proclamation, order, judgment or other proceedings before or
 during trial or in any inquiry or other proceedings under this Sanhita, or any error, or
 irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution, unless in the opinion of that Court, a failure
 of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.
 (2) In determining whether any error, omission or irregularity in any proceeding under
 this Sanhita, or any error, or irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution has occasioned
 a failure of justice, the Court shall have regard to the fact whether the objection could and
 should have been raised at an earlier stage in the proceedings.
 514. No attachment made under this Sanhita shall be deemed unlawful, nor shall any
 person making the same be deemed a trespasser, on account of any defect or want of form
 in the summons, conviction, writ of attachment or other proceedings relating thereto.
 CHAPTER XXXVIII
 LIMITATION FOR TAKING COGNIZANCE OF CERTAIN OFFENCES
 515. For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, "period
 of limitation" means the period specified in section 517 for taking cognizance of an offence.
 516. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Sanhita, no Court shall take cognizance
 of an offence of the category specified in sub-section (2), after the expiry of the period of
 limitation.
 (2) The period of limitation shall be—
 (a) six months, if the offence is punishable with fine only;
 (b) one year, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term not
 exceeding one year;
 Non
compliance
 with provisions
 of section 183
 or section 316.
 Effect of
 omission to
 frame, or
 absence of, or
 error in,
 charge.
 Finding or
 sentence when
 reversible by
 reason of
 error,
 omission or
 irregularity.
 Defect or
 error not to
 make
 attachment
 unlawful.
 Definitions.
 Bar to taking
 cognizance
 after lapse of
 period of
 limitation.
154
 (c) three years, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term
 exceeding one year but not exceeding three years.
 (3) For the purposes of this section, the period of limitation, in relation to offences
 which may be tried together, shall be determined with reference to the offence which is
 punishable with the more severe punishment or, as the case may be, the most severe
 punishment.
 Explanation.—For the purpose of computing the period of limitation, the relevant
 date shall be the date of filing complaint under section 223 or the date of recording of
 information under section 173.
 Commencement
 of period of
 limitation.
 Exclusion of
 time in
 certain cases.
 Exclusion of
 date on which
 Court is closed.
 517. (1) The period of limitation, in relation to an offender, shall commence,—
 (a) on the date of the offence; or
 (b) where the commission of the offence was not known to the person aggrieved
 by the offence or to any police officer, the first day on which such offence comes to
 the knowledge of such person or to any police officer, whichever is earlier; or
 (c) where it is not known by whom the offence was committed, the first day on
 which the identity of the offender is known to the person aggrieved by the offence or
 to the police officer making investigation into the offence, whichever is earlier.
 (2) In computing the said period, the day from which such period is to be computed
 shall be excluded.
 518. (1) In computing the period of limitation, the time during which any person has
 been prosecuting with due diligence another prosecution, whether in a Court of first instance
 or in a Court of appeal or revision, against the offender, shall be excluded:
 Provided that no such exclusion shall be made unless the prosecution relates to the
 same facts and is prosecuted in good faith in a Court which from defect of jurisdiction or
 other cause of a like nature, is unable to entertain it.
 (2) Where the institution of the prosecution in respect of an offence has been stayed
 by an injunction or order, then, in computing the period of limitation, the period of the
 continuance of the injunction or order, the day on which it was issued or made, and the day
 on which it was withdrawn, shall be excluded.
 (3) Where notice of prosecution for an offence has been given, or where, under any
 law for the time being in force, the previous consent or sanction of the Government or any
 other authority is required for the institution of any prosecution for an offence, then, in
 computing the period of limitation, the period of such notice or, as the case may be, the time
 required for obtaining such consent or sanction shall be excluded.
 Explanation.—In computing the time required for obtaining the consent or sanction
 of the Government or any other authority, the date on which the application was made for
 obtaining the consent or sanction and the date of receipt of the order of the Government or
 other authority shall both be excluded.
 (4) In computing the period of limitation, the time during which the offender—
 (a) has been absent from India or from any territory outside India which is
 under the administration of the Central Government; or
 (b) has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing himself,
 shall be excluded.
 519. Where the period of limitation expires on a day when the Court is closed, the
 Court may take cognizance on the day on which the Court reopens.
 Explanation.—A Court shall be deemed to be closed on any day within the meaning
 of this section, if, during its normal working hours, it remains closed on that day.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
155
 520. In the case of a continuing offence, a fresh period of limitation shall begin to run
 at every moment of the time during which the offence continues.
 5
 10
 46 of 1950.
 62 of 1957.
 45 of 1950.
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 521. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter,
 any Court may take cognizance of an offence after the expiry of the period of limitation, if it
 is satisfied on the facts and in the circumstances of the case that the delay has been
 properly explained or that it is necessary so to do in the interests of justice.
 CHAPTER XXXIX
 MISCELLANEOUS
 522. When an offence is tried by the High Court otherwise than under section 448, it
 shall, in the trial of the offence, observe the same procedure as a Court of Sessions would
 observe if it were trying the case.
 523. (1) The Central Government may make rules consistent with this Sanhita and the
 Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957, and the Air Force Act, 1950, and any other law, relating
 to the Armed Forces of the Union, for the time being in force, as to cases in which persons
 subject to military, naval or air-force law, or such other law, shall be tried by a Court to which
 this Sanhita applies, or by a Court-martial; and when any person is brought before a Magistrate
 and charged with an offence for which he is liable to be tried either by a Court to which this
 Sanhita applies or by a Court-martial, such Magistrate shall have regard to such rules, and
 shall in proper cases deliver him, together with a statement of the offence of which he is
 accused, to the commanding officer of the unit to which he belongs, or to the commanding
 officer of the nearest military, naval or air-force station, as the case may be, for the purpose
 of being tried by a Court-martial.
 Explanation.—In this section—
 (a) "Unit" includes a regiment, corps, ship, detachment, group, battalion or
 Company;
 (b) "Court-martial" includes any Tribunal with the powers similar to those of a
 Court-martial constituted under the relevant law applicable to the Armed Forces of
 the Union.
 (2) Every Magistrate shall, on receiving a written application for that purpose by the
 commanding officer of any unit or body of soldiers, sailors or airmen stationed or employed
 at any such place, use his utmost endeavours to apprehend and secure any person accused
 of such offence.
 (3) A High Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that a prisoner detained in any jail situate
 within the State be brought before a Court-martial for trial or to be examined touching any
 matter pending before the Court-martial.
 524. Subject to the power conferred by article 227 of the Constitution, the forms set
 forth in the Second Schedule, with such variations as the circumstances of each case
 require, may be used for the respective purposes therein mentioned, and if used shall be
 sufficient.
 525. (1) Every High Court may, with the previous approval of the State Government,
 make rules—
 (a) as to the persons who may be permitted to act as petition-writers in the
 Criminal Courts subordinate to it;
 (b) regulating the issue of licences to such persons, the conduct of business by
 them, and the scale of fees to be charged by them;
 (c) providing a penalty for a contravention of any of the rules so made and
 determining the authority by which such contravention may be investigated and the
 penalties imposed;
 (d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, provided by rules made
 by the State Government.
 Continuing
 offence.
 Extension of
 period of
 limitation in
 certain cases.
 Trials before
 High Courts.
 Delivery to
 commanding
 officers of
 persons liable
 to be tried by
 Court-martial.
 Forms.
 Power of High
 Court to make
 rules.
156
 (2) All rules made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette.
 Power to alter
 functions
 allocated to
 Executive
 Magistrate in
 certain cases.
 Case in which
 Judge or
 Magistrate is
 personally
 interested.
 Practicing
 advocate not
 to sit as
 Magistrate in
 certain Courts.
 Public servant
 concerned in
 sale not to
 purchase or
 bid for
 property.
 Saving of
 inherent
 powers of
 High Court.
 Duty of High
 Court to
 exercise
 continuous
 superintendence
 over Courts.
 Trial and
 proceedings to
 be held in
 electronic
 mode.
 Repeal and
 savings.
 526. If the Legislative Assembly of a State by a resolution so permits, the State
 Government may, after consultation with the High Court, by notification, direct that references
 in sections 127, 128, 129, 164 and 166 to an Executive Magistrate shall be construed as
 references to a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.
 527. No Judge or Magistrate shall, except with the permission of the Court to which
 an appeal lies from his Court, try or commit for trial any case to or in which he is a party, or
 personally interested, and no Judge or Magistrate shall hear an appeal from any judgment
 or order passed or made by himself.
 Explanation.—A Judge or Magistrate shall not be deemed to be a party to, or
 personally interested in, any case by reason only that he is concerned therein in a public
 capacity, or by reason only that he has viewed the place in which an offence is alleged to
 have been committed, or any other place in which any other transaction material to the case
 is alleged to have occurred, and made an inquiry in connection with the case.
 528. No advocate who practices in the Court of any Magistrate shall sit as a Magistrate
 in that Court or in any Court within the local jurisdiction of that Court.
 529. A public servant having any duty to perform in connection with the sale of any
 property under this Sanhita shall not purchase or bid for the property.
 530. Nothing in this Sanhita shall be deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of
 the High Court to make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order under
 this Sanhita, or to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the
 ends of justice.
 531. Every High Court shall so exercise its superintendence over the Courts of Sessions
 and Courts of Judicial Magistrates subordinate to it as to ensure that there is an expeditious
 and proper disposal of cases by the Judges and Magistrates.
 532. All trials, inquires and proceedings under this Code, including—
 (i) summons and warrant, issuance, service and execution thereof;
 (ii) holding of inquiry;
 (iii) examination of complainant and witnesses;
 (iv) trial before a Court of Session, trial in warrant cases, trial in summons-cases,
 summary trials and plea bargaining;
 (v) recording of evidence in inquiries and trials;
 (vi) trials before High Courts;
 (vii) all appellate proceedings and such other proceedings,
 may be held in electronic mode, by use of electronic communication or use of audio-video
 electronic means.
 533. (1) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is hereby repealed.
 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal—
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 2 of 1974.
157
 2 of 1974.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 (a) if, immediately before the date on which this Sanhita comes into force, there
 is any appeal, application, trial, inquiry or investigation pending, then, such appeal,
 application, trial, inquiry or investigation shall be disposed of, continued, held or
 made, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal
 Procedure, 1973, as in force immediately before such commencement (hereinafter
 referred to as the old Code), as if this Sanhita had not come into force:
 Provided that every inquiry under Chapter XIV of the Old Code, which is pending
 at the commencement of this Sanhita, shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance
 with the provisions of this Sanhita;
 (b) all notifications published, proclamations issued, powers conferred, forms
 provided by rules local jurisdictions defined, sentences passed and orders, rules and
 appointments, not being appointments as Special Magistrates, made under the Old
 Code and which are in force immediately before the commencement of this Sanhita,
 shall be deemed, respectively, to have been published, issued, conferred, specified,
 defined, passed or made under the corresponding provisions of this Sanhita;
 (c) any sanction accorded or consent given under the Old Code in pursuance of
 which no proceeding was commenced under that Code, shall be deemed to have been
 accorded or given under the corresponding provisions of this Sanhita and proceedings
 may be commenced under this Sanhita in pursuance of such sanction of consent;
 (d) the provisions of the Old Code shall continue to apply in relation to every
 prosecution against a Ruler within the meaning of article 363 of the Constitution.
 (3) Where the period specified for an application or other proceeding under the Old
 Code had expired on or before the commencement of this Sanhita, nothing in this Sanhita
 shall be construed as enabling any such application to be made or proceeding to be
 commenced under this Sanhita by reason only of the fact that a longer period therefor is
 specified by this Sanhita or provisions are made in this Sanhita for the extension of time.
158 
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES 
EXPLANATORY NOTES: (1) In regard to offences under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, the entries 
in the second and  third columns against a section the number of which 
is given in the first column are not intended as the definition of, and the 
punishment prescribed for, the offence in the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 
but merely as indication of the substance of the section. 
(2) In this Schedule, (i) the expression “Magistrate of the first class” and 
“Any Magistrate” but not including Executive Magistrates; (ii) the word 
“cognizable” stands for “a police officer may arrest without warrant”; 
and (iii) the word “non-cognizable” stands for “a police officer shall not 
arrest without warrant”. 
I. –OFFENCES UNDER THE BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA 
Section Offence Punishment Cognizable or non- 
cognizable 
Bailable or Non- 
bailable 
By what 
Court triable 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
 
49 Punishment of abetment if the act abetted is 
committed in consequence and where no express 
provision is made for its punishment. 
Same as for 
offence    abetted. 
According as 
offence  abetted is 
cognizable  or non
cognizable. 
According as 
offence abetted 
is  bailable or 
non- bailable. 
Court by 
which 
offence 
abetted is 
triable. 
50 Punishment of abetment if person abetted does 
act with different intention from that of abettor. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
51 Liability of abettor when one act abetted and 
different act done 
Same as for 
offence intended to 
be abetted. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
52 Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment 
for act abetted and for act done. 
Same as for 
offence 
committed. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto 
53 Liability of abettor for an effect caused by the act 
abetted different from that intended by the 
abettor. 
Same as for 
offence 
committed. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
54 Abettor present when offence is committed. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
55 (1) Abetment of offence punishable with death 
or imprisonment for life. 
Imprisonment for  
7 years  and fine. 
Ditto Non-bailable Ditto. 
 (2) If an act which causes harm be done in 
consequence of the abetment. 
Imprisonment for  
14 years  and fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
56 (1) Abetment of offence punishable with 
imprisonment. 
Imprisonment 
extending to a quarter 
part of the longest term 
provided for the 
offence, or fine, or both. 
Ditto According as 
offence abetted 
is bailable or 
non- bailable. 
Ditto. 
 (2) If the abettor or the person abetted be   a 
public servant whose duty it is to prevent the 
offence. 
one-half of the longest 
term provided for that 
offence, or with such fine 
as is provided for the 
offence, or with both. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
159 
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
57 Abetting commission of offence by the public 
or by more than ten persons. 
imprisonment of either 
description for a term which 
may extend to seven years 
and with fine 
According as offence 
abetted is cognizable 
or non-cognizable. 
According as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or   non- 
bailable. 
Court by 
which offence 
abetted is 
triable. 
58 Concealing design to commit offence 
punishable with death or imprisonment for 
life. 
(i) if that offence be 
committed, be punished 
with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which 
may extend to seven years; 
or 
Ditto non- bailable. Ditto 
  (ii) if the offence be not 
committed, with 
imprisonment of either 
description, for a term 
which may extend to three 
years, 
Ditto bailable Ditto 
59 A public servant concealing a design to 
commit an offence which it is his duty to 
prevent, if the offence be committed. 
Imprisonment extending to 
half of the longest term 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both. 
Ditto According as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non- 
bailable. 
Ditto. 
 If the offence be punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life. 
Imprisonment for 10 years. Ditto Non-bailable. Ditto. 
 If the offence be not committed. Imprisonment extending to 
a quarter part of the longest 
term provided for the 
offence, or fine, or both. 
Ditto Bailable. Ditto. 
60 Concealing a design to commit an offence 
punishable with imprisonment, if offence be 
committed. 
Ditto Ditto According as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non- 
bailable. 
Ditto. 
 If the offence be not committed. Imprisonment extending to 
one-eighth part of the 
longest term provided for 
the offence, or fine, or 
both. 
Ditto Bailable. Ditto. 
 
61 Criminal conspiracy to commit 
an offence punishable with 
death, imprisonment for life  or 
rigorous imprisonment for a 
term of 2 years  or upwards. 
Same as for abetment of the offence 
which is the object of the conspiracy. 
According as the 
offence which is 
the object of 
conspiracy is 
cognizable or 
non- cognizable. 
According 
as offence 
which is 
object of 
conspiracy 
is bailable 
or non- 
bailable. 
Court by which 
abetment of the 
offence which 
is the object of 
conspiracy is 
triable. 
 Any other criminal conspiracy. Imprisonment for  6 months, or fine, or 
both. 
Non-cognizable. Bailable. Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
62 Attempting to commit offences 
punishable with imprisonment for 
life, or imprisonment, and in such 
attempt doing any act towards the 
commission of the offence. 
Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment 
not exceeding half.of the longest term, 
provided for the offence, or fine, or both 
According as the 
offence is 
cognizable or non
cognizable. 
According as 
the offence 
attempted by 
the offender 
is bailable or 
not. 
The court by 
which the 
offence 
attempted is 
triable. 
64 (1) Rape. Rigorous imprisonment of  not less than 
10 years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and with fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
160 
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
64 (2) Rape by a police officer or a public 
servant or member of armed forces 
or a person being on the 
management or on the staff of a 
jail, remand home or other place of 
custody or women’s or children’s 
institution or by a person on the 
management or on the staff of a 
hospital, and rape committed by a 
person in a position of trust or 
authority towards the person 
raped or by a near relative of the 
person raped. 
Rigorous imprisonment of not less 
than 10 years  but which may extend 
to  imprisonment for life which shall 
mean the remainder of that person’s 
natural life and  with fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
65(1) Persons committing offence of 
rape on a   woman under sixteen 
years of age. 
Rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than 20 years 
but which may extend to imprisonment 
for life, which shall mean 
imprisonment for the remainder of that 
person’s natural life and 
with fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
65(2) Punishment for rape in certain 
cases. 
 
 
Rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than twenty 
years, but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life, which shall 
mean imprisonment for the remainder 
of that person's natural life, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
 
Rigorous imprisonment of not less 
than 20 years  but which may extend 
to  imprisonment for life which shall 
mean imprisonment for that person’s 
natural life and with    fine or with 
death.  
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
66 Person committing an offence of 
rape and inflicting injury which 
causes death or causes the woman 
to be in a persistent vegetative 
state. 
Rigorous imprisonment of not less 
than 20 years  but which may extend 
to  imprisonment for life which shall 
mean imprisonment for the remainder 
of that person’s natural life or 
with death. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
67 Sexual intercourse by husband upon 
his wife during separation or by a 
person in authority. 
Imprisonment for not less  than 2 years 
but which may extend to 7 years and 
with fine. 
Cognizable Bailable Court of 
Session. 
68 Sexual intercourse by a person in 
authority. 
 
rigorous imprisonment of either 
description for a term which shall not 
be less than five years, but which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session 
69 Sexual intercourse by employing 
deceitful means etc. 
 
imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to ten years and 
shall also be liable to fine 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session 
70 (1) Gang rape Rigorous imprisonment for not less 
than 20 years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life which shall mean 
imprisonment for the remainder of that 
person’s natural life and with fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
70 (2) Gang rape on a woman under 
eighteen years of age. 
Imprisonment for life which shall mean 
imprisonment for the remainder of that 
person’s natural life and with fine or 
with death. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
71 Repeat offenders. Imprisonment for life which shall mean 
imprisonment for the remainder of that 
person’s natural life or with death. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
161 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
72 (1) Disclosure of identity of the 
victim of certain offences, etc. 
Imprisonment for two years and fine. Cognizable Ditto Any Magistrate. 
72 (3) Printing or   publication   of   a   
proceeding without prior 
permission of court. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto 
73 Assault or use of criminal force to 
woman with intent to outrage her 
modesty. 
Imprisonment of 1 year which may extend 
to 5 years, and with fine. 
Cognizable Non-bailable Any 
Magistrate 
74 Sexual harassment and 
punishment for sexual harassment. 
Offence specified in clause (iv) of 
sub-section (1). 
Rigorous imprisonment with three years, 
or with fine, or with both. 
One year, or with fine, or with both. 
Cognizable Bailable Any 
Magistrate 
75 Assault or use of criminal force to 
woman with intent to disrobe. 
Imprisonment of not less than 3 years but 
which may extend to 7 years and with fine. 
Cognizable Non-bailable Any 
Magistrate. 
76 Voyeurism. Imprisonment of not less than 1 year but 
which may extend to 3 years and with fine 
for first conviction. 
Cognizable Bailable Any 
Magistrate. 
  Imprisonment of not less than 3 years but 
which may extend 7 years and with fine 
for second or subsequent conviction. 
Cognizable Non-bailable Any 
Magistrate 
77 Stalking. Imprisonment up to 3 years and with     
fine for first conviction. 
Cognizable Bailable Any 
Magistrate. 
  Imprisonment up to 5 years and with fine 
for second or subsequent conviction. 
Cognizable Non-bailable Any 
Magistrate. 
78 Uttering any word or making any 
gesture intended to insult the 
modesty of a woman, etc. 
Simple imprisonment for 3 years and with 
fine. 
Cognizable Ditto Ditto. 
79 Dowry death. seven years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life. 
Ditto Non-bailable Court of 
Session. 
80 A man by deceit causing a woman 
not lawfully married to him to 
believe, that she is lawfully 
married to him and to cohabit with 
him in that belief. 
Imprisonment for 10 years and fine. Non
cognizable 
Non-bailable Magistrate 
of the first 
class. 
81(1) Marrying again during the life 
time of a husband or wife. 
Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine. 
Ditto Bailable Ditto. 
81(2) Same offence with concealment of 
the former marriage from the 
person with whom subsequent 
marriage is contracted. 
Imprisonment for 10 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
82 A person with fraudulent intention 
going through the ceremony of 
being married, knowing that he is 
not thereby lawfully married. 
Imprisonment for 7 years and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
83 Enticing or taking away or 
detaining with a criminal intent a 
married woman. 
 
Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or both. Ditto Ditto Any 
Magistrate. 
162 
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
84 Punishment for subjecting a 
married woman to cruelty. 
Imprisonment for three years and fine. Cognizable if 
information relating 
to the commission of 
the offence is given 
to an officer in 
charge of a police 
station by the person 
aggrieved by the 
offence or by any 
person related to her 
by blood, marriage or 
adoption or if there is 
no such relative, by 
any public servant 
belonging to such 
class or category as 
may be notified by 
the State 
Government 
in this behalf. 
Non-bailable Magistrate 
of the first 
class.] 

 
