85 Kidnapping, abducting or 
inducing woman to compel her 
marriage, etc. 
Imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. 
Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session. 
86 Causing miscarriage. Imprisonment for 3 years, or 
fine, or both. 
Non
cognizable 
Bailable Magistrate 
of the first 
class. 
 If the woman be quick with child. Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
87 Causing   miscarriage without 
women's consent 
Imprisonment for life, or imprisonment 
for 10 years and fine. 
Cognizable Non-bailable Court of  Session. 
88 Death caused by an act done 
with intent  to  cause miscarriage. 
Imprisonment for 10 years  and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 If act done without women’s 
consent. 
Imprisonment for life, or as  above. Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
89 Act done with intent to prevent a 
child being born alive, or to cause 
it to die after its birth. 
Imprisonment for 10 years,  or fine, or 
both. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
90 Causing death of a quick unborn 
child by an act amounting to 
culpable homicide. 
Imprisonment for 10 years  and fine. Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
91 Exposure of a child under 12 
years of age by parent or person 
having care of it with intention 
of wholly abandoning it. 
Imprisonment for 7 years,  or fine, or 
both. 
Ditto Bailable Magistrate of  the first 
class. 
92 Concealment of birth by secret 
disposal of  dead body. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or 
both. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
93 Hiring, employing or engaging a 
child to commit an offence. 
imprisonment of either description or 
fine provided for that offence as if the 
offence has been committed by such 
person himself 
According as 
offence 
committed is 
cognizable  or 
non
cognizable. 
According as 
offence 
committed is 
bailable or   
non- bailable. 
Court by which 
offence committed 
is triable. 
94 Procuration of child. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
95 Kidnapping or abducting child 
under ten years with intent to steal 
from its person. 
Imprisonment for 7 years and fine Ditto Ditto Magistrate of  the 
first class. 
96 Selling child for purposes of 
prostitution, etc. 
Imprisonment for 10  years and 
fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
97 Buying child for purposes of 
prostitution, etc. 
Imprisonment for 14 years 
and fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
Murder 
Murder by life-convict. 
Culpable homicide not amounting 
to murder. 
Causing death by negligence. 
Abetment of suicide of child or 
person with mental illness. 
Abetment of suicide. 
Attempt to murder 
Attempt to commit culpable 
homicide 
(1) Death, or imprisonment for life, and 
fine. 
(2) death or with imprisonment for life or 
imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than seven years and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
death or with imprisonment for life, which 
shall mean the remainder of that person’s 
natural life. 
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of 
either description for a term which shall not 
be less than five years but which may extend 
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, 
if the act by which the death is caused is 
done with the intention of causing death, or 
of causing such bodily injury as is likely to 
cause death; or with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to 
ten years and with fine, if the act is done 
with the knowledge that it is likely to cause 
death, but without any intention to cause 
death, or to cause such bodily injury as is 
likely to cause death. 
(1) Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine.  
(2) Imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine . 
Death, or imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. 
Imprisonment for 10 years and fine. 
(1) , if he by that act caused death, he 
would be guilty of murder, shall 
be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term 
which may extend to ten years, 
and shall also be liable to fine; 
and if hurt is caused to any person 
by such act, the offender shall be 
liable either to imprisonment for 
life, or to such punishment as is 
hereinbefore mentioned. 
(2) any person offending under sub
section (1) is under sentence of 
imprisonment for life, he may, if 
hurt is caused, be punished with 
death or with imprisonment for 
life, which shall mean the 
remainder of that person’s natural 
life. 
(1) three years, or with fine, or with 
both; and, if hurt is caused to any 
person by such act, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term 
which may extend to seven years, 
or with fine, or with both. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Non
bailable 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Non
bailable 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Magistrate 
of the first 
class. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
163 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
If such act causes hurt to any 
person 
109(2) For commission of Organised crime 
or attempt for commission of 
Organised crime 
109(3)  
109(4)  
109(5)  
109(6)  
109(7)  
(2) Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, or 
both. 
if such offence has resulted in the death of 
any person, be punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable 
to fine which shall not be less than rupees 
ten lakhs 
in any other case, be punishable with  
imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than five years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable 
to fine which shall not be less than rupees 
five lakhs 
Whoever, conspires or organises the 
commission of an organised crime, or 
assists, facilitates or otherwise engages in 
any act preparatory to an organised crime, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than five years 
but which may extend to imprisonment for 
life and shall also be liable to fine which 
shall not be less than rupees five lakhs 
Any person who is a member of an 
organised crime syndicate shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than five years but 
which may extend to imprisonment for life 
and shall also be liable to fine which shall 
not be less than rupees five lakhs 
Whoever, intentionally harbours or conceals 
or attempts to harbour or conceal any person 
who has committed the offence of an 
organised crime or any member of an 
organised crime syndicate or believes that 
his act will encourage or assist the doing of 
such crime shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than three years but which may extend 
to imprisonment for life and shall also be 
liable to fine which shall not be less than 
rupees five lakhs 
Whoever, holds any property derived, or 
obtained from the commission of an 
organised crime or proceeds of any 
organised crime or which has been acquired 
through the organised crime syndicate funds 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than three years 
but which may extend to imprisonment for 
life and shall also be liable to fine which 
shall not be less than rupees two lakhs 
If any person on behalf of a member of an 
organised crime syndicate is, or at any time 
has been in possession of movable or 
immovable property which he cannot 
satisfactorily account for, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than three years but 
which may extend to imprisonment for ten 
years and shall also be liable to fine which 
shall not be less than rupees one lakh and 
such property shall also be liable for 
attachment and forfeiture 
Ditto 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Non
bailable 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
Court of 
Session. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
164 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
110 
111 
Petty Organised crime or 
organised crime in general. 
Offence of terrorist act 
113(2) Voluntarily causing hurt. 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than one year but which may extend to 
seven years and shall also be liable to fine 
if such offence has resulted in the death of 
any person, be punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life without the benefit of 
parole and shall also be liable to fine which 
shall not be less than rupees ten lakhs 
in any other case, be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than five years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable 
to fine which shall not be less than rupees 
five lakhs 
conspires, organises or causes to be 
organised any organisation, association or a 
group of persons for terrorist acts, or assists, 
facilitates or otherwise conspires to engage 
in any act preparatory to any terrorist act, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than five years 
but which may extend to imprisonment for 
life and shall also be liable to fine which 
shall not be less than rupees five lakhs 
member of terrorist organisation, which is 
involved in terrorist act, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to imprisonment for life and shall 
also be liable to fine which shall not be less 
than rupees five lakhs 
intentionally harbours or conceals or 
attempts to harbour or conceal any person 
who has committed an offence of any 
terrorist act shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than three years but which may extend 
to imprisonment for life and shall also be 
liable to fine which shall not be less than 
rupees five lakhs 
holds any property directly or indirectly, 
derived or obtained from commission of 
terrorist act or proceeds of terrorism, or 
acquired through the terrorist fund, or 
possesses, provides, collects or uses 
property or funds or makes available 
property, funds or financial service or other 
related services, by any means, to be used, 
in full or in part to carry out or facilitate the 
commission of any terrorist act, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to imprisonment for life 
and shall also be liable to fine which shall 
not be less than rupees five lakhs and such 
property shall also be liable for attachment 
and forfeiture 
Imprisonment for 1 year or fine of 10,000 
rupees, or both. 
115(2) Voluntarily causing grievous hurt. Imprisonment for 7 years and fine. 
Non
Cognizable 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Non
cognizable 
Ditto 
bailable 
Non
bailable 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any Magistrate 
Court of 
Session. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
Ditto. 
165 
166 
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
116 (1) Voluntarily    causing    hurt    
by dangerous weapons or means. 
(2) Voluntarily    causing    
grievous hurt    by dangerous 
weapons or means. 
 
(1) imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to three years,  or 
with fine which may extend  to twenty  
thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2 ) not less than one year but which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
 
Cognizable Ditto Ditto. 
117 Voluntarily causing hurt or 
grievous hurt to extort property, or 
to constrain to an illegal to an act. 
(1) imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to ten years, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) voluntarily causes grievous hurt for any 
purpose referred to in sub–section (1), shall 
be punished with imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to ten years, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
118(1) Voluntarily causing hurt to 
extort confession 
or information, or to compel 
restoration of  property, etc. 
Imprisonment for 7 years  and fine. Ditto Bailable Magistrate of the 
first class. 
118(2) Voluntarily causing grievous 
hurt to extort confession or 
information, or to compel 
restoration of property, etc. 
Imprisonment for 10 years  and fine. Ditto Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
119 Voluntarily causing hurt or 
grievous hurt to deter public 
servant from his duty. 
(1) five years, or with fine, or with 
both. 
(2) ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
Cognizable 1[Non
bailable] 
Ditto. 
 
120(1) Voluntarily causing hurt on grave 
and sudden provocation, not 
intending to hurt any other than the 
person who gave the provocation. 
Imprisonment for 1 month, or  
fine of 5000 rupees, or both. 
Non
cognizable 
Bailable Any 
Magistrate. 
120(2) Causing grievous   hurt   on   
grave   and   sudden provocation, 
not intending to hurt any other than 
the person who gave the 
provocation. 
Imprisonment for 5 years, or  
fine of 10,000 rupees, or both. 
Cognizable Ditto Magistrate of 
the  first class. 
121 Causing hurt by means of poison, 
etc., with intent to commit an 
offence. 
Imprisonment of either 
description for a term which 
may extend to ten years, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session. 
122(1) Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by 
use of acid, etc. 
Imprisonment for not less than 
10 years but which may extend 
to imprisonment for life and fine 
to be paid to the victim. 
Cognizable Non-bailable Court of 
Session 
122(2) Voluntarily throwing or attempting 
to throw acid. 
Imprisonment for 5 years but 
which may extend to 7 years and 
with fine. 
Cognizable Non-bailable Court of 
Session.] 
123 Act endangering life or personal 
safety of others. 
(a) where the hurt is caused, 
 
 
(b) where grievous hurt is  caused, 
Imprisonment for 3 months, or 
fine of 2500 rupees, or both. 
six months, or with fine which 
may extend to five thousand 
rupees, or with both. 
three years, or with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand 
rupees, or with both. 
Ditto Ditto Any 
Magistrate. 
167 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
124(2) Wrongfully restraining any person. Simple imprisonment for  
1 month, or fine of 5000 rupees, 
or both. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
125(2) Wrongfully confining any person. Imprisonment for 1 year, or 
fine of 5,000 rupees, or both. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
125(3) Wrongfully confining for three or 
more days. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, or 
Fine of 10000 rupees, or both. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
125(4) Wrongfully confining for 10 or more 
days. 
Imprisonment for 5 years and 
fine of 10000 rupees. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
125(5) Keeping any person in wrongful 
confinement, knowing that a writ 
has been issued for his liberation. 
Imprisonment of either 
description for a term which 
may extend to two years in 
addition to any term of 
imprisonment to which he may 
be liable under any other section 
of this Chapter and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
Ditto Ditto Magistrate of 
the first class. 
125(6) Wrongful confinement in secret. Three years in addition to any 
other punishment to which he 
may be liable for such wrongful 
confinement and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
125(7) Wrongful confinement for the 
purpose of extorting property, or 
constraining to an illegal act, etc. 
Imprisonment of either 
description for a term which 
may extend to three years, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
Ditto Ditto Any 
Magistrate. 
125(8) Wrongful confinement for the 
purpose of extorting confession or 
information, or of compelling 
restoration of property, etc. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
129 Assault or criminal force otherwise 
than on grave provocation. 
Three months, or with fine 
which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
Non
cognizable 
Ditto Ditto. 
130 Assault or criminal force to deter 
public servant from discharge of his 
duty. 
imprisonment of either 
description for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both 
Ditto Ditto Ditto 
131 Assault or criminal force with intent 
to dishonor a person, otherwise than 
on grave and sudden provocation. 
imprisonment of either 
description for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both 
Non
cognizable 
Bailable Ditto. 
132 Assault or criminal force in attempt 
to commit theft of property worn or 
carried by a person. 
imprisonment of either 
description for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
Cognizable Ditto Ditto. 
133 Assault or   use   of   criminal   force   
in   attempt wrongfully to confine a 
person. 
Imprisonment for 1 year, or 
fine of 5,000 rupees, or both. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
134 Assault or use of criminal force on 
grave and sudden provocation. 
Simple imprisonment for one 
month, or fine of 1000 rupees, 
or both. 
Non
cognizable 
Ditto Ditto. 
135 Kidnapping Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine. 
Cognizable Ditto Magistrate of the 
first class. 
137(1) Kidnaping a child. Rigorous imprisonment which 
shall not be less than 10 years 
but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
Cognizable Non-bailable Magistrate of the 
first class. 
137(2) Maiming a child for purposes of 
begging. 
Imprisonment which shall not be 
less than 20 years which may 
extend to remainder of life, and 
with fine. 
Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session. 
138(1) Kidnapping or abducting in order to 
murder. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
rigorous imprisonment for 
10 years and fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
168 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
138(2) Kidnapping for ransom, etc. Death, or imprisonment for 
life and fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto.] 
138(3) Kidnapping or abducting with 
intent secretly and wrongfully to 
confine a person. 
Imprisonment 
and fine. 
for 7 years Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session. 
138(4) Kidnapping or abducting in order to 
subject a person to grievous hurt, 
slavery, etc. 
Imprisonment 
and fine. 
for 10 years Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session. 
139 Importation of a girl or boy from 
foreign country. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
140 Wrongfully concealing or keeping in 
confinement, kidnapped or abducted 
person. 
Punishment for kidnapping  or 
abduction. 
Ditto Ditto Court by 
which the 
kidnapping 
or abduction 
is triable. 
141 Trafficking of person. Imprisonment of not less than 7 years 
but which may extend to 10 years and 
with fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
 Trafficking of more than one person. Imprisonment of not less than  
10 years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and with fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
 Trafficking of a child. Imprisonment of not less than  
10 years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and with fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
 Trafficking of more than one child. Imprisonment of not less than  
14 years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and with fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
 Person convicted of offence of 
trafficking of child on more than one 
occasion. 
Imprisonment for life which shall 
mean the remainder of that person’s 
natural life and with fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
 Public servant or a police officer 
involved in trafficking of child. 
Imprisonment for life which shall 
mean the remainder of that person’s 
natural life and with fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
142 Exploitation of a trafficked child. Imprisonment of not less than 
5 years but which may extend 
to 10 years and with fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
 Exploitation of a trafficked person. Imprisonment of not less than 
3 years but which may extend 
to 7 years and with fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session.] 
143 Habitual dealing in slaves. Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 
years and fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
144 Unlawful compulsory labour. Imprisonment for 1 year, or 
fine, or both. 
Ditto Bailable Any 
Magistrate. 
145 Waging or attempting to wage war, or 
abetting the waging of war, against the 
Government of India. 
Death, or imprisonment for 
life and fine. 
Cognizable. Non
bailable. 
Court of 
Session. 
146 Conspiring to commit certain offences 
against the State. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
147 Collecting arms, etc., with the 
intention of waging war against the 
Government of India. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
169 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
148 Concealing with intent to facilitate a 
design to wage war. 
Imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
149 Assaulting President, Governor, etc., 
with intent to compel or restrain the 
exercise of any lawful power. 
Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
150 Acts endangering sovereignty unity 
and integrity of India. 
 
Imprisonment for life and fine, 
or imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine, or fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
151 Waging war against Government of 
any foreign State at peace with the 
Government of India. 
Imprisonment for life and fine, 
or imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine, or fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
152 Committing depredation on the 
territories of any power in alliance or 
at peace with the Government of 
India. 
Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine, and forfeiture of certain 
property. 
Ditto Ditto. Ditto. 
153 Receiving property taken by war or 
depredation mentioned in sections 153 
and 154. 
Ditto. Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
154 Public servant voluntarily allowing 
prisoner of state or war to escape. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
155 Public servant negligently suffering 
such prisoner to escape. 
Simple imprisonment for  
3 years and fine. 
Ditto Bailable Magistrate of the 
first class. 
156 Aiding escape of, rescuing or 
harbouring such prisoner. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. 
Ditto Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
157 Abetting mutiny, or attempting to 
seduce a soldier, sailor or airman from 
his duty. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Cognizable Non
bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
158 Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is 
committed in consequence thereof. 
Death, or imprisonment for 
life, or imprisonment for  
10 years and fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
159 Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor 
or airman on his superior officer, 
when in execution of his office. 
Imprisonment for 3 years and 
fine. 
Ditto Ditto Magistrate of the 
first class. 
160 Abetment of such assault, if the 
assault committed. 
Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto 
161 Abetment of desertion of soldier, 
sailor or airman. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, or 
fine, or both. 
Ditto Bailable Any 
Magistrate. 
162 Harbouring deserter. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
163 Deserter concealed on board merchant 
vessel through negligence of master. 
Fine of 3000 rupees. Non
cognizable 
Ditto. Ditto. 
164 Abetment of act of insubordination by 
soldier, sailor or airman. 
Imprisonment for 2 years or fine, 
or both. 
Cognizable Ditto. Ditto. 
166 Wearing garb or carrying token used 
by soldier, sailor or airman. 
Imprisonment for 3 months, or fine 
of 2000 rupees, or both. 
Ditto. Ditto Ditto 
171 Bribery. Imprisonment for 1 year or fine, or 
both, or if treating only, fine only. 
Non
cognizable 
Ditto Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
172 Undue influence at an election. 
 
Personation at an election 
Imprisonment for one year, or 
fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
Ditto. 
170 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
173 False statement in connection with an 
election. 
Fine Non
cognizable 
Ditto Ditto. 
174 Illegal payments in connection with 
elections. 
Fine of 10,000 rupees. Ditto. Ditto. Ditto. 
175 Failure to keep election accounts. Fine of 5,000 rupees. Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
 
176 
 
Counterfeiting, or performing any part 
of the process of counterfeiting, coin. 
 
imprisonment for life, or with 
imprisonment of either 
description for a term which 
may extend to ten years and 
fine. 
 
Cognizable 
 
Non-bailable 
 
Court of 
Session. 
176 Counterfeiting currency
notes or bank-notes. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. 
Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session. 
177 Using as genuine forged
 or 
counterfeit currency-notes or bank- 
notes. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
177 Using as genuine, forged or 
counterfeit coin, Government stamp, 
currency-notes or bank notes. 
imprisonment for life, or with 
imprisonment of either 
description for a term which 
may extend to ten years and 
fine. 
Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session. 
177 Using as genuine, forged or 
counterfeit coin, Government stamp, 
currency-notes or bank notes. 
imprisonment for life, or with 
imprisonment of either 
description for a term which 
may extend to ten years, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
Ditto Ditto Ditto. 
178 Possession of forged or counterfeit 
coin, Government stamp, currency
notes or bank-notes. 
imprisonment of either 
description for a term which 
may extend to seven years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session. 
178 Possession of forged or counterfeit 
coin, Government stamp, currency
notes or bank-notes. 
imprisonment of either 
description for a term which 
may extend to seven years or 
with fine, or with both. 
Ditto Ditto Court of 
Session. 
178 Having possession of a counterfeit 
Government stamp. 
imprisonment of either 
description for a term which 
may extend to seven years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
Ditto Bailable Ditto. 
178 Possession of forged or counterfeit 
currency-notes or bank-notes. 
Imprisonment for 7 years, or 
fine, or both.  
Ditto Bailable Ditto. 
179 Making or possessing machinery, 
instrument or material for forging or 
counterfeiting currency-notes or 
bank-notes. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. 
Ditto Non
bailable 
Ditto. 
