62. Special provisions as to evidence relating to electronic record.—The contents of 
electronic records may be proved in accordance with the provisions of section 63. 
63. Admissibility of electronic records.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Adhiniyam, any information contained in an electronic record which is printed on paper, stored, recorded 
or copied in optical or magnetic media or semiconductor memory which is produced by a computer or 
any communication device or otherwise stored, recorded or copied in any electronic form (hereinafter 
referred to as the computer output) shall be deemed to be also a document, if the conditions mentioned in 
this section are satisfied in relation to the information and computer in question and shall be admissible in 
any proceedings, without further proof or production of the original, as evidence or any contents of the 
original or of any fact stated therein of which direct evidence would be admissible. 
27 
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section (1) in respect of a computer output shall be the 
following, namely:— 
(a) the computer output containing the information was produced by the computer or 
communication device during the period over which the computer or Communication device was 
used regularly to create, store or process information for the purposes of any activity regularly carried 
on over that period by the person having lawful control over the use of the computer or 
communication device; 
(b) during the said period, information of the kind contained in the electronic record or of the 
kind from which the information so contained is derived was regularly fed into the computer or 
Communication device in the ordinary course of the said activities; 
(c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer or communication device was 
operating properly or, if not, then in respect of any period in which it was not operating properly or 
was out of operation during that part of the period, was not such as to affect the electronic record or 
the accuracy of its contents; and 
(d) the information contained in the electronic record reproduces or is derived from such 
information fed into the computer or Communication device in the ordinary course of the said 
activities. 
(3) Where over any period, the function of creating, storing or processing information for the 
purposes of any activity regularly carried on over that period as mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (2) 
was regularly performed by means of one or more computers or communication device, whether— 
(a) in standalone mode; or 
(b) on a computer system; or 
(c) on a computer network; or 
(d) on a computer resource enabling information creation or providing information processing 
and storage; or 
(e) through an intermediary, 
all the computers or communication devices used for that purpose during that period shall be treated for 
the purposes of this section as constituting a single computer or communication device; and references in 
this section to a computer or communication device shall be construed accordingly. 
(4) In any proceeding where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by virtue of this section, a 
certificate doing any of the following things shall be submitted along with the electronic record at each 
instance where it is being submitted for admission, namely:— 
(a) identifying the electronic record containing the statement and describing the manner in which 
it was produced; 
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that electronic record as 
may be appropriate for the purpose of showing that the electronic record was produced by a computer 
or a communication device referred to in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (3); 
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in sub-section (2) relate,  
and purporting to be signed by a person in charge of the computer or communication device or the 
management of the relevant activities (whichever is appropriate) and an expert shall be evidence of any 
matter stated in the certificate; and for the purposes of this sub-section it shall be sufficient for a matter to 
be stated to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person stating it in the certificate specified in the 
Schedule. 
(5) For the purposes of this section,— 
28 
(a) information shall be taken to be supplied to a computer or communication device if it is 
supplied thereto in any appropriate form and whether it is so supplied directly or (with or without 
human intervention) by means of any appropriate equipment; 
(b) a computer output shall be taken to have been produced by a computer or communication 
device whether it was produced by it directly or (with or without human intervention) by means of 
any appropriate equipment or by other electronic means as referred to in clauses (a) to (e) of                    
sub-section (3). 
64. Rules as to notice to produce.—Secondary evidence of the contents of the documents referred to 
in clause (a) of section 60, shall not be given unless the party proposing to give such secondary evidence 
has previously given to the party in whose possession or power the document is, or to his advocate or 
representative, such notice to produce it as is prescribed by law; and if no notice is prescribed by law, 
then such notice as the Court considers reasonable under the circumstances of the case: 
Provided that such notice shall not be required in order to render secondary evidence admissible in 
any of the following cases, or in any other case in which the Court thinks fit to dispense with it:— 
(a) when the document to be proved is itself a notice; 
(b) when, from the nature of the case, the adverse party must know that he will be required to 
produce it; 
(c) when it appears or is proved that the adverse party has obtained possession of the original by 
fraud or force; 
(d) when the adverse party or his agent has the original in Court; 
(e) when the adverse party or his agent has admitted the loss of the document; 
(f) when the person in possession of the document is out of reach of, or not subject to, the process 
of the Court. 
65. Proof of signature and handwriting of person alleged to have signed or written document 
produced.—If a document is alleged to be signed or to have been written wholly or in part by any person, 
the signature or the handwriting of so much of the document as is alleged to be in that person's 
handwriting must be proved to be in his handwriting. 
66. Proof as to electronic signature.—Except in the case of a secure electronic signature, if the 
electronic signature of any subscriber is alleged to have been affixed to an electronic record, the fact that 
such electronic signature is the electronic signature of the subscriber must be proved. 
67. Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested.—If a document is required by 
law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been called for the 
purpose of proving its execution, if there be an attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of the 
Court and capable of giving evidence: 
Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an attesting witness in proof of the execution of any 
document, not being a will, which has been registered in accordance with the provisions of the Indian 
Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), unless its execution by the person by whom it purports to have been 
executed is specifically denied. 
68. Proof where no attesting witness found.—If no such attesting witness can be found, it must be 
proved that the attestation of one attesting witness at least is in his handwriting, and that the signature of 
the person executing the document is in the handwriting of that person. 
69. Admission of execution by party to attested document.—The admission of a party to an 
attested document of its execution by himself shall be sufficient proof of its execution as against him, 
though it be a document required by law to be attested. 
70. Proof when attesting witness denies execution.—If the attesting witness denies or does not 
recollect the execution of the document, its execution may be proved by other evidence. 
29 
71. Proof of document not required by law to be attested.—An attested document not required by 
law to be attested may be proved as if it was unattested. 
72. Comparison of signature, writing or seal with others admitted or proved.—(1) In order to 
ascertain whether a signature, writing or seal is that of the person by whom it purports to have been 
written or made, any signature, writing, or seal admitted or proved to the satisfaction of the Court to have 
been written or made by that person may be compared with the one which is to be proved, although that 
signature, writing or seal has not been produced or proved for any other purpose. 
(2) The Court may direct any person present in Court to write any words or figures for the purpose of 
enabling the Court to compare the words or figures so written with any words or figures alleged to have 
been written by such person. 
(3) This section applies also, with any necessary modifications, to finger impressions. 
73. Proof as to verification of digital signature.—In order to ascertain whether a digital signature is 
that of the person by whom it purports to have been affixed, the Court may direct— 
(a) that person or the Controller or the Certifying Authority to produce the Digital Signature 
Certificate; 
(b) any other person to apply the public key listed in the Digital Signature Certificate and verify 
the digital signature purported to have been affixed by that person. 
Public documents 
74. Public and private documents.—(1) The following documents are public documents:— 
(a) documents forming the acts, or records of the acts— 
(i) of the sovereign authority; 
(ii) of official bodies and tribunals; and 
(iii) of public officers, legislative, judicial and executive of India or of a foreign country; 
(b) public records kept in any State or Union territory of private documents. 
(2) All other documents except the documents referred to in sub-section (1) are private. 
75. Certified copies of public documents.—Every public officer having the custody of a public 
document, which any person has a right to inspect, shall give that person on demand a copy of it on 
payment of the legal fees therefor, together with a certificate written at the foot of such copy that it is a 
true copy of such document or part thereof, as the case may be, and such certificate shall be dated and 
subscribed by such officer with his name and his official title, and shall be sealed, whenever such officer 
is authorised by law to make use of a seal; and such copies so certified shall be called certified copies. 
Explanation.—Any officer who, by the ordinary course of official duty, is authorised to deliver such 
copies, shall be deemed to have the custody of such documents within the meaning of this section. 
76. Proof of documents by production of certified copies.—Such certified copies may be produced 
in proof of the contents of the public documents or parts of the public documents of which they purport to 
be copies. 
77. Proof of other official documents.—The following public documents may be proved as     
follows: — 
(a) Acts, orders or notifications of the Central Government in any of its Ministries and 
Departments or of any State Government or any Department of any State Government or Union 
territory Administration— 
(i) by the records of the Departments, certified by the head of those Departments 
respectively; or 
30 
(ii) by any document purporting to be printed by order of any such Government; 
(b) the proceedings of Parliament or a State Legislature, by the journals of those bodies 
respectively, or by published Acts or abstracts, or by copies purporting to be printed by order of the 
Government concerned; 
(c) proclamations, orders or Regulations issued by the President of India or the Governor of a 
State or the Administrator or Lieutenant Governor of a Union territory, by copies or extracts 
contained in the Official Gazette; 
(d) the Acts of the Executive or the proceedings of the Legislature of a foreign country, by 
journals published by their authority, or commonly received in that country as such, or by a copy 
certified under the seal of the country or sovereign, or by a recognition thereof in any Central Act; 
(e) the proceedings of a municipal or local body in a State, by a copy of such proceedings, 
certified by the legal keeper thereof, or by a printed book purporting to be published by the authority 
of such body; 
(f) public documents of any other class in a foreign country, by the original or by a copy certified 
by the legal keeper thereof, with a certificate under the seal of a Notary Public, or of an Indian 
Consul or diplomatic agent, that the copy is duly certified by the officer having the legal custody of 
the original, and upon proof of the character of the document according to the law of the foreign 
country. 
Presumptions as to documents 
78. Presumption as to genuineness of certified copies.—(1) The Court shall presume to be genuine 
every document purporting to be a certificate, certified copy or other document, which is by law declared 
to be admissible as evidence of any particular fact and which purports to be duly certified by any officer 
of the Central Government or of a State Government: 
Provided that such document is substantially in the form and purports to be executed in the manner 
directed by law in that behalf. 
(2) The Court shall also presume that any officer by whom any such document purports to be signed 
or certified, held, when he signed it, the official character which he claims in such paper. 
79. Presumption as to documents produced as record of evidence, etc.—Whenever any document 
is produced before any Court, purporting to be a record or memorandum of the evidence, or of any part of 
the evidence, given by a witness in a judicial proceeding or before any officer authorised by law to take 
such evidence or to be a statement or confession by any prisoner or accused person, taken in accordance 
with law, and purporting to be signed by any Judge or Magistrate, or by any such officer as aforesaid, the 
Court shall presume that— 
(i) the document is genuine; 
(ii) any statements as to the circumstances under which it was taken, purporting to be made by 
the person signing it, are true; and 
(iii) such evidence, statement or confession was duly taken. 
80. Presumption as to Gazettes, newspapers, and other documents.—The Court shall presume the 
genuineness of every document purporting to be the Official Gazette, or to be a newspaper or journal, and 
of every document purporting to be a document directed by any law to be kept by any person, if such 
document is kept substantially in the form required by law and is produced from proper custody. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 92, document is said to be in proper 
custody if it is in the place in which, and looked after by the person with whom such document is 
required to be kept; but no custody is improper if it is proved to have had a legitimate origin, or if the 
circumstances of the particular case are such as to render that origin probable. 
31 
81. Presumption as to Gazettes in electronic or digital record.—The Court shall presume the 
genuineness of every electronic or digital record purporting to be the Official Gazette, or purporting to be 
electronic or digital record directed by any law to be kept by any person, if such electronic or digital 
record is kept substantially in the form required by law and is produced from proper custody. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 93 electronic records are said to be in 
proper custody if they are in the place in which, and looked after by the person with whom such 
document is required to be kept; but no custody is improper if it is proved to have had a legitimate origin, 
or the circumstances of the particular case are such as to render that origin probable. 
82. Presumption as to maps or plans made by authority of Government.—The Court shall 
presume that maps or plans purporting to be made by the authority of the Central Government or any 
State Government were so made, and are accurate; but maps or plans made for the purposes of any cause 
must be proved to be accurate. 
83. Presumption as to collections of laws and reports of decisions.—The Court shall presume the 
genuineness of, every book purporting to be printed or published under the authority of the Government 
of any country, and to contain any of the laws of that country, and of every book purporting to contain 
reports of decisions of the Courts of such country. 
84. Presumption as to powers-of-attorney.—The Court shall presume that every document 
purporting to be a power-of-attorney, and to have been executed before, and authenticated by, a Notary 
Public, or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, Indian Consul or Vice-Consul, or representative of the Central 
Government, was so executed and authenticated. 
85. Presumption as to electronic agreements.—The Court shall presume that every electronic 
record purporting to be an agreement containing the electronic or digital signature of the parties was so 
concluded by affixing the electronic or digital signature of the parties. 
86. Presumption as to electronic records and electronic signatures.—(1) In any proceeding 
involving a secure electronic record, the Court shall presume unless contrary is proved, that the secure 
electronic record has not been altered since the specific point of time to which the secure status relates. 
(2) In any proceeding, involving secure electronic signature, the Court shall presume unless the 
contrary is proved that— 
(a) the secure electronic signature is affixed by subscriber with the intention of signing or 
approving the electronic record; 
(b) except in the case of a secure electronic record or a secure electronic signature, nothing in this 
section shall create any presumption, relating to authenticity and integrity of the electronic record or 
any electronic signature. 
87. Presumption as to Electronic Signature Certificates.—The Court shall presume, unless 
contrary is proved, that the information listed in an Electronic Signature Certificate is correct, except for 
information specified as subscriber information which has not been verified, if the certificate was 
accepted by the subscriber. 
88. Presumption as to certified copies of foreign judicial records.—(1) The Court may presume 
that any document purporting to be a certified copy of any judicial record of any country beyond India is 
genuine and accurate, if the document purports to be certified in any manner which is certified by any 
representative of the Central Government in or for such country to be the manner commonly in use in that 
country for the certification of copies of judicial records. 
(2) An officer who, with respect to any territory or place outside India is a Political Agent therefor, as 
defined in clause (43) of section 3 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), shall, for the purposes 
of this section, be deemed to be a representative of the Central Government in and for the country 
comprising that territory or place. 
89. Presumption as to books, maps and charts.—The Court may presume that any book to which it 
may refer for information on matters of public or general interest, and that any published map or chart, 
the statements of which are relevant facts, and which is produced for its inspection, was written and 
32 
published by the person, and at the time and place, by whom or at which it purports to have been written 
or published. 
90. Presumption as to electronic messages.—The Court may presume that an electronic message, 
forwarded by the originator through an electronic mail server to the addressee to whom the message 
purports to be addressed corresponds with the message as fed into his computer for transmission; but the 
Court shall not make any presumption as to the person by whom such message was sent. 
91. Presumption as to due execution, etc., of documents not produced.—The Court shall presume 
that every document, called for and not produced after notice to produce, was attested, stamped and 
executed in the manner required by law. 
92. Presumption as to documents thirty years old.—Where any document, purporting or proved to 
be thirty years old, is produced from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, 
the Court may presume that the signature and every other part of such document, which purports to be in 
the handwriting of any particular person, is in that person’s handwriting, and, in the case of a document 
executed or attested, that it was duly executed and attested by the persons by whom it purports to be 
executed and attested. 
Explanation.—The Explanation to section 80 shall also apply to this section. 
Illustrations. 
(a) A has been in possession of landed property for a long time. He produces from his custody deeds 
relating to the land showing his titles to it. The custody shall be proper. 
(b) A produces deeds relating to landed property of which he is the mortgagee. The mortgagor is in 
possession. The custody shall be proper. 
(c) A, a connection of B, produces deeds relating to lands in B's possession, which were deposited 
with him by B for safe custody. The custody shall be proper. 
93. Presumption as to electronic records five years old.—Where any electronic record, purporting 
or proved to be five years old, is produced from any custody which the Court in the particular case 
considers proper, the Court may presume that the electronic signature which purports to be the electronic 
signature of any particular person was so affixed by him or any person authorised by him in this behalf. 
Explanation.—The Explanation to section 81 shall also apply to this section. 
CHAPTER VI 
OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL EVIDENCE BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE 
94. Evidence of terms of contracts, grants and other dispositions of property reduced to form of 
document.—When the terms of a contract, or of a grant, or of any other disposition of property, have 
been reduced to the form of a document, and in all cases in which any matter is required by law to be 
reduced to the form of a document, no evidence shall be given in proof of the terms of such contract, 
grant or other disposition of property, or of such matter, except the document itself, or secondary 
evidence of its contents in cases in which secondary evidence is admissible under the provisions 
hereinbefore contained. 
Exception 1.—When a public officer is required by law to be appointed in writing, and when it is 
shown that any particular person has acted as such officer, the writing by which he is appointed need not 
be proved. 
Exception 2.—Wills admitted to probate in India may be proved by the probate. 
Explanation 1.—This section applies equally to cases in which the contracts, grants or dispositions of 
property referred to are contained in one document, and to cases in which they are contained in more 
documents than one. 
Explanation 2.—Where there are more originals than one, one original only need be proved. 
33 
Explanation 3.—The statement, in any document whatever, of a fact other than the facts referred to in 
this section, shall not preclude the admission of oral evidence as to the same fact. 
Illustrations. 
(a) If a contract be contained in several letters, all the letters in which it is contained must be proved. 
(b) If a contract is contained in a bill of exchange, the bill of exchange must be proved. 
(c) If a bill of exchange is drawn in a set of three, one only need be proved. 
(d) A contracts, in writing, with B, for the delivery of indigo upon certain terms. The contract 
mentions the fact that B had paid A the price of other indigo contracted for verbally on another occasion. 
Oral evidence is offered that no payment was made for the other indigo. The evidence is admissible. 
(e) A gives B a receipt for money paid by B. Oral evidence is offered of the payment. The evidence is 
admissible. 
95. Exclusion of evidence of oral agreement.—When the terms of any such contract, grant or other 
disposition of property, or any matter required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, have been 
proved according to section 94, no evidence of any oral agreement or statement shall be admitted, as 
between the parties to any such instrument or their representatives in interest, for the purpose of 
contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting from, its terms: 
Provided that any fact may be proved which would invalidate any document, or which would entitle 
any person to any decree or order relating thereto; such as fraud, intimidation, illegality, want of due 
execution, want of capacity in any contracting party, want or failure of consideration, or mistake in fact 
or law: 
Provided further that the existence of any separate oral agreement as to any matter on which a 
document is silent, and which is not inconsistent with its terms, may be proved. In considering whether or 
not this proviso applies, the Court shall have regard to the degree of formality of the document: 
Provided also that the existence of any separate oral agreement, constituting a condition precedent to 
the attaching of any obligation under any such contract, grant or disposition of property, may be proved: 
Provided also that the existence of any distinct subsequent oral agreement to rescind or modify any 
such contract, grant or disposition of property, may be proved, except in cases in which such contract, 
grant or disposition of property is by law required to be in writing, or has been registered according to the 
law in force for the time being as to the registration of documents: 
Provided also that any usage or custom by which incidents not expressly mentioned in any contract 
are usually annexed to contracts of that description, may be proved: 
Provided also that the annexing of such incident would not be repugnant to, or inconsistent with, the 
express terms of the contract: 
Provided also that any fact may be proved which shows in what manner the language of a document 
is related to existing facts. 
Illustrations. 
(a) A policy of insurance is effected on goods “in ships from Kolkata to Visakhapatnam”. The goods 
are shipped in a particular ship which is lost. The fact that particular ship was orally excepted from the 
policy, cannot be proved. 
(b) A agrees absolutely in writing to pay B one thousand rupees on the 1st March, 2023. The fact 
that, at the same time, an oral agreement was made that the money should not be paid till the 31st March, 
2023, cannot be proved. 
(c) An estate called “the Rampur tea estate” is sold by a deed which contains a map of the property 
sold. The fact that land not included in the map had always been regarded as part of the estate and was 
meant to pass by the deed cannot be proved. 
34 
(d) A enters into a written contract with B to work certain mines, the property of B, upon certain 
terms. A was induced to do so by a misrepresentation of B's as to their value. This fact may be proved. 
(e) A institutes a suit against B for the specific performance of a contract, and also prays that the 
contract may be reformed as to one of its provisions, as that provision was inserted in it by mistake. A 
may prove that such a mistake was made as would by law entitle him to have the contract reformed. 
(f) A orders goods of B by a letter in which nothing is said as to the time of payment, and accepts the 
goods on delivery. B sues A for the price. A may show that the goods were supplied on credit for a term 
still unexpired. 
(g) A sells B a horse and verbally warrants him sound. A gives B a paper in these words— “Bought 
of A a horse for thirty thousand rupees”. B may prove the verbal warranty. 
(h) A hires lodgings of B, and gives B a card on which is written— “Rooms, ten thousand rupees a 
month”. A may prove a verbal agreement that these terms were to include partial board. A hires lodging 
of B for a year, and a regularly stamped agreement, drawn up by an advocate, is made between them. It is 
silent on the subject of board. A may not prove that board was included in the term verbally. 
(i) A applies to B for a debt due to A by sending a receipt for the money. B keeps the receipt and does 
not send the money. In a suit for the amount, A may prove this. 
(j) A and B make a contract in writing to take effect upon the happening of a certain contingency. 
The writing is left with B who sues A upon it. A may show the circumstances under which it was 
delivered. 
96.  Exclusion of evidence to explain or amend ambiguous document.—When the language used 
in a document is, on its face, ambiguous or defective, evidence may not be given of facts which would 
show its meaning or supply its defects. 
Illustrations. 
(a) A agrees, in writing, to sell a horse to B for “one lakh rupees or one lakh fifty thousand rupees”. 
Evidence cannot be given to show which price was to be given. 
(b) A deed contains blanks. Evidence cannot be given of facts which would show how they were 
meant to be filled. 
97. Exclusion of evidence against application of document to existing facts.—When language 
used in a document is plain in itself, and when it applies accurately to existing facts, evidence may not be 
given to show that it was not meant to apply to such facts. 
Illustration. 
A sells to B, by deed, “my estate at Rampur containing one hundred bighas”. A has an estate at 
Rampur containing one hundred bighas. Evidence may not be given of the fact that the estate meant to be 
sold was one situated at a different place and of a different size. 
98. Evidence as to document unmeaning in reference to existing facts.—When language used in a 
document is plain in itself, but is unmeaning in reference to existing facts, evidence may be given to 
show that it was used in a peculiar sense. 
Illustration. 
A sells to B, by deed, “my house in Kolkata”. A had no house in Kolkata, but it appears that he had a 
house at Howrah, of which B had been in possession since the execution of the deed. These facts may be 
proved to show that the deed related to the house at Howrah. 
99.  Evidence as to application of language which can apply to one only of several persons.—
 When the facts are such that the language used might have been meant to apply to any one, and could not 
have been meant to apply to more than one, of several persons or things, evidence may be given of facts 
which show which of those persons or things it was intended to apply to. 
35 
Illustrations. 
(a) A agrees to sell to B, for one thousand rupees, “my white horse”. A has two white horses. 
Evidence may be given of facts which show which of them was meant. 
(b) A agrees to accompany B to Ramgarh. Evidence may be given of facts showing whether Ramgarh 
in Rajasthan or Ramgarh in Uttarakhand was meant. 
100. Evidence as to application of language to one of two sets of facts, to neither of which the 
whole correctly applies.—When the language used applies partly to one set of existing facts, and partly 
to another set of existing facts, but the whole of it does not apply correctly to either, evidence may be 
given to show to which of the two it was meant to apply. 
Illustration. 
A agrees to sell to B “my land at X in the occupation of Y”. A has land at X, but not in the 
occupation of Y, and he has land in the occupation of Y but it is not at X. Evidence may be given of facts 
showing which he meant to sell. 
101. Evidence as to meaning of illegible characters, etc.—Evidence may be given to show the 
meaning of illegible or not commonly intelligible characters, of foreign, obsolete, technical, local and 
regional expressions, of abbreviations and of words used in a peculiar sense. 
Illustration. 
A, sculptor, agrees to sell to B, “all my mods”. A has both models and modelling tools. Evidence 
may be given to show which he meant to sell. 
102. Who may give evidence of agreement varying terms of document.—Persons who are not 
parties to a document, or their representatives in interest, may give evidence of any facts tending to show 
a contemporaneous agreement varying the terms of the document. 
Illustration. 
A and B make a contract in writing that B shall sell A certain cotton, to be paid for on delivery. At 
the same time, they make an oral agreement that three months’ credit shall be given to A. This could not 
be shown as between A and B, but it might be shown by C, if it affected his interests. 
103. Saving of provisions of Indian Succession Act relating to wills.—Nothing in this Chapter 
shall be taken to affect any of the provisions of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925) as to the 
construction of wills. 
PART IV 
PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE 
CHAPTER VII 
OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF 
104. Burden of proof.—Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal right or liability 
dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts must prove that those facts exist, and when a person 
is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of proof lies on that person. 
Illustrations. 
(a) A desires a Court to give judgment that B shall be punished for a crime which A says B has 
committed. A must prove that B has committed the crime. 
(b) A desires a Court to give judgment that he is entitled to certain land in the possession of B, by 
reason of facts which he asserts, and which B denies, to be true. A must prove the existence of those 
facts. 
105. On whom burden of proof lies.—The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that 
person who would fail if no evidence at all were given on either side. 
36 
Illustrations. 
(a) A sues B for land of which B is in possession, and which, as A asserts, was left to A by the will of 
C, B's father. If no evidence were given on either side, B would be entitled to retain his possession. 
Therefore, the burden of proof is on A. 
(b) A sues B for money due on a bond. The execution of the bond is admitted, but B says that it was 
obtained by fraud, which A denies. If no evidence were given on either side, A would succeed, as the 
bond is not disputed and the fraud is not proved. Therefore, the burden of proof is on B. 
106. Burden of proof as to particular fact.—The burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on 
that person who wishes the Court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that the 
proof of that fact shall lie on any particular person. 
Illustration. 
A prosecutes B for theft, and wishes the Court to believe that B admitted the theft to C. A must prove 
the admission. B wishes the Court to believe that, at the time in question, he was elsewhere. He must 
prove it. 
107. Burden of proving fact to be proved to make evidence admissible.—The burden of proving 
any fact necessary to be proved in order to enable any person to give evidence of any other fact is on the 
person who wishes to give such evidence. 
Illustrations. 
(a) A wishes to prove a dying declaration by B. A must prove B's death. 
(b) A wishes to prove, by secondary evidence, the contents of a lost document. A must prove that the 
document has been lost. 
108. Burden of proving that case of accused comes within exceptions.—When a person is accused 
of any offence, the burden of proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case within any of the 
General Exceptions in the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or within any special exception or proviso 
contained in any other part of the said Sanhita, or in any law defining the offence, is upon him, and the 
Court shall presume the absence of such circumstances. 
Illustrations. 
(a) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by reason of unsoundness of mind, he did not know the nature 
of the act. The burden of proof is on A. 
(b) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by grave and sudden provocation, he was deprived of the 
power of self-control. The burden of proof is on A. 
(c) Section 117 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 provides that whoever, except in the case 
provided for by sub-section (2) of section 122, voluntarily causes grievous hurt, shall be subject to certain 
punishments. A is charged with voluntarily causing grievous hurt under section 117. The burden of 
proving the circumstances bringing the case under sub-section (2) of section 122 lies on A. 
109. Burden of proving fact especially within knowledge.—When any fact is especially within the 
knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him. 
Illustrations. 
(a) When a person does an act with some intention other than that which the character and 
circumstances of the act suggest, the burden of proving that intention is upon him. 
(b) A is charged with travelling on a railway without a ticket. The burden of proving that he had a 
ticket is on him. 
110. Burden of proving death of person known to have been alive within thirty years.—When 
the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is shown that he was alive within thirty years, the 
burden of proving that he is dead is on the person who affirms it. 
37 
111. Burden of proving that person is alive who has not been heard of for seven years.—When 
the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is proved that he has not been heard of for seven 
years by those who would naturally have heard of him if he had been alive, the burden of proving that he 
is alive is shifted to the person who affirms it. 
112. Burden of proof as to relationship in the cases of partners, landlord and tenant, principal 
and agent.—When the question is whether persons are partners, landlord and tenant, or principal and 
agent, and it has been shown that they have been acting as such, the burden of proving that they do not 
stand, or have ceased to stand, to each other in those relationships respectively, is on the person who 
affirms it. 
113. Burden of proof as to ownership.—When the question is whether any person is owner of 
anything of which he is shown to be in possession, the burden of proving that he is not the owner is on 
the person who affirms that he is not the owner. 
114. Proof of good faith in transactions where one party is in relation of active confidence.—
 Where there is a question as to the good faith of a transaction between parties, one of whom stands to the 
other in a position of active confidence, the burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the 
party who is in a position of active confidence. 
Illustrations. 
(a) The good faith of a sale by a client to an advocate is in question in a suit brought by the client. 
The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the advocate. 
(b) The good faith of a sale by a son just come of age to a father is in question in a suit brought by the 
son. The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the father. 
115. Presumption as to certain offences.—(1) Where a person is accused of having committed any 
offence specified in sub-section (2), in— 
(a) any area declared to be a disturbed area under any enactment for the time being in force, 
making provision for the suppression of disorder and restoration and maintenance of public order; or 
(b) any area in which there has been, over a period of more than one month, extensive 
disturbance of the public peace, 
and it is shown that such person had been at a place in such area at a time when firearms or explosives 
were used at or from that place to attack or resist the members of any armed forces or the forces charged 
with the maintenance of public order acting in the discharge of their duties, it shall be presumed, unless 
the contrary is shown, that such person had committed such offence. 
(2) The offences referred to in sub-section (1) are the following, namely:— 
(a) an offence under section 147, section 148, section 149 or section 150 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023; 
(b) criminal conspiracy or attempt to commit, or abetment of, an offence under section 
149 or section 150 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
116. Birth during marriage, conclusive proof of legitimacy.—The fact that any person was born 
during the continuance of a valid marriage between his mother and any man, or within two hundred and 
eighty days after its dissolution, the mother remaining unmarried, shall be conclusive proof that he is the 
legitimate child of that man, unless it can be shown that the parties to the marriage had no access to each 
other at any time when he could have been begotten. 
117. Presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman.—When the question is whether 
the commission of suicide by a woman had been abetted by her husband or any relative of her husband 
and it is shown that she had committed suicide within a period of seven years from the date of her 
marriage and that her husband or such relative of her husband had subjected her to cruelty, the Court may 
38 
presume, having regard to all the other circumstances of the case, that such suicide had been abetted by 
her husband or by such relative of her husband. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “cruelty” shall have the same meaning as in                 
section 86 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
118. Presumption as to dowry death.—When the question is whether a person has committed the 
dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death, such woman had been subjected by 
such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall 
presume that such person had caused the dowry death. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “dowry death” shall have the same meaning as 
in section 80 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
119. Court may presume existence of certain facts.—(1) The Court may presume the existence of 
any fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the common course of natural 
events, human conduct and public and private business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case. 
Illustrations. 
The Court may presume that— 
(a) a man who is in possession of stolen goods soon, after the theft is either the thief or has 
received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for his possession; 
(b) an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material particulars; 
(c) a bill of exchange, accepted or endorsed, was accepted or endorsed for good consideration; 
(d) a thing or state of things which has been shown to be in existence within a period shorter than 
that within which such things or state of things usually cease to exist, is still in existence; 
(e) judicial and official acts have been regularly performed; 
(f) the common course of business has been followed in particular cases; 
(g) evidence which could be and is not produced would, if produced, be unfavourable to the 
person who withholds it; 
(h) if a man refuses to answer a question which he is not compelled to answer by law, the answer, 
if given, would be unfavourable to him; 
(i) when a document creating an obligation is in the hands of the obligor, the obligation has been 
discharged. 
(2) The Court shall also have regard to such facts as the following, in considering whether such 
maxims do or do not apply to the particular case before it:— 
(i) as to Illustration (a)—a shop-keeper has in his bill a marked rupee soon after it was stolen, 
and cannot account for its possession specifically, but is continually receiving rupees in the course of 
his business; 
(ii) as to Illustration (b) —A, a person of the highest character, is tried for causing a man's death 
by an act of negligence in arranging certain machinery. B, a person of equally good character, who 
also took part in the arrangement, describes precisely what was done, and admits and explains the 
common carelessness of A and himself; 
(iii) as to Illustration (b) —a crime is committed by several persons. A, B and C, three of the 
criminals, are captured on the spot and kept apart from each other. Each gives an account of the crime 
implicating D, and the accounts corroborate each other in such a manner as to render previous 
concert highly improbable; 
39 
(iv) as to Illustration (c)—A, the drawer of a bill of exchange, was a man of business. B, the 
acceptor, was a young and ignorant person, completely under A's influence; 
(v) as to Illustration (d)—it is proved that a river ran in a certain course five years ago, but it is 
known that there have been floods since that time which might change its course; 
(vi) as to Illustration (e)—a judicial act, the regularity of which is in question, was performed 
under exceptional circumstances; 
(vii) as to Illustration (f)—the question is, whether a letter was received. It is shown to have been 
posted, but the usual course of the post was interrupted by disturbances; 
(viii) as to Illustration (g)—a man refuses to produce a document which would bear on a contract 
of small importance on which he is sued, but which might also injure the feelings and reputation of 
his family; 
(ix) as to Illustration (h)—a man refuses to answer a question which he is not compelled by law 
to answer, but the answer to it might cause loss to him in matters unconnected with the matter in 
relation to which it is asked; 
(x) as to Illustration (i)—a bond is in possession of the obligor, but the circumstances of the case 
are such that he may have stolen it. 
120. Presumption as to absence of consent in certain prosecution for rape.—In a prosecution for 
rape under sub-section (2) of section 64 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, where sexual intercourse 
by the accused is proved and the question is whether it was without the consent of the woman alleged to 
have been raped and such woman states in her evidence before the Court that she did not consent, the 
Court shall presume that she did not consent. 
Explanation.—In this section, “sexual intercourse” shall mean any of the acts mentioned in                 
section 63 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 
CHAPTER VIII 
ESTOPPEL 
121. Estoppel.—When one person has, by his declaration, act or omission, intentionally caused or 
permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, neither he nor his 
representative shall be allowed, in any suit or proceeding between himself and such person or his 
representative, to deny the truth of that thing. 
Illustration. 
A intentionally and falsely leads B to believe that certain land belongs to A, and thereby induces B to 
buy and pay for it. The land afterwards becomes the property of A, and A seeks to set aside the sale on 
the ground that, at the time of the sale, he had no title. He must not be allowed to prove his want of title. 
122. Estoppel of tenant and of licensee of person in possession.—No tenant of immovable 
property, or person claiming through such tenant, shall, during the continuance of the tenancy or any time 
thereafter, be permitted to deny that the landlord of such tenant had, at the beginning of the tenancy, a 
title to such immovable property; and no person who came upon any immovable property by the licence 
of the person in possession thereof shall be permitted to deny that such person had a title to such 
possession at the time when such licence was given. 
123. Estoppel of acceptor of bill of exchange, bailee or licensee.—No acceptor of a bill of 
exchange shall be permitted to deny that the drawer had authority to draw such bill or to endorse it; nor 
shall any bailee or licensee be permitted to deny that his bailor or licensor had, at the time when the 
bailment or licence commenced, authority to make such bailment or grant such licence. 
Explanation 1.—The acceptor of a bill of exchange may deny that the bill was really drawn by the 
person by whom it purports to have been drawn. 
Explanation 2.—If a bailee delivers the goods bailed to a person other than the bailor, he may prove 
that such person had a right to them as against the bailor. 
40 
CHAPTER IX 
OF WITNESSES 
124. Who may testify.—All persons shall be competent to testify unless the Court considers that 
they are prevented from understanding the questions put to them, or from giving rational answers to those 
questions, by tender years, extreme old age, disease, whether of body or mind, or any other cause of the 
same kind. 
Explanation.—A person of unsound mind is not incompetent to testify, unless he is prevented by his 
unsoundness of mind from understanding the questions put to him and giving rational answers to them. 
125. Witness unable to communicate verbally.—A witness who is unable to speak may give his 
evidence in any other manner in which he can make it intelligible, as by writing or by signs; but such 
writing must be written and the signs made in open Court and evidence so given shall be deemed to be 
oral evidence: 
Provided that if the witness is unable to communicate verbally, the Court shall take the assistance of 
an interpreter or a special educator in recording the statement, and such statement shall be videographed. 
126. Competency of husband and wife as witnesses in certain cases.—(1) In all civil proceedings 
the parties to the suit, and the husband or wife of any party to the suit, shall be competent witnesses. 
(2) In criminal proceedings against any person, the husband or wife of such person, respectively, 
shall be a competent witness. 
127. Judges and Magistrates.—No Judge or Magistrate shall, except upon the special order of some 
Court to which he is subordinate, be compelled to answer any question as to his own conduct in Court as 
such Judge or Magistrate, or as to anything which came to his knowledge in Court as such Judge or 
Magistrate; but he may be examined as to other matters which occurred in his presence whilst he was so 
acting. 
Illustrations. 
(a) A, on his trial before the Court of Session, says that a deposition was improperly taken by B, the 
Magistrate. B cannot be compelled to answer questions as to this, except upon the special order of a 
superior Court. 
(b) A is accused before the Court of Session of having given false evidence before B, a Magistrate. B 
cannot be asked what A said, except upon the special order of the superior Court. 
(c) A is accused before the Court of Session of attempting to murder a police officer whilst on his 
trial before B, a Sessions Judge. B may be examined as to what occurred. 
128. Communications during marriage.—No person who is or has been married, shall be 
compelled to disclose any communication made to him during marriage by any person to whom he is or 
has been married; nor shall he be permitted to disclose any such communication, unless the person who 
made it, or his representative in interest, consents, except in suits between married persons, or 
proceedings in which one married person is prosecuted for any crime committed against the other. 
129. Evidence as to affairs of State.—No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from 
unpublished official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the officer at 
the head of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he thinks fit. 
130. Official communications.—No public officer shall be compelled to disclose communications 
made to him in official confidence, when he considers that the public interests would suffer by the 
disclosure. 
131. Information as to commission of offences.—No Magistrate or police officer shall be 
compelled to say when he got any information as to the commission of any offence, and no revenue 
officer shall be compelled to say when he got any information as to the commission of any offence 
against the public revenue. 
41 
Explanation.—“revenue officer” means any officer employed in or about the business of any branch 
of the public revenue. 
132. Professional communications.—(1) No advocate, shall at any time be permitted, unless with 
his client’s express consent, to disclose any communication made to him in the course and for the 
purpose of his service as such advocate, by or on behalf of his client, or to state the contents or condition 
of any document with which he has become acquainted in the course and for the purpose of his 
professional service, or to disclose any advice given by him to his client in the course and for the purpose 
of such service: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall protect from disclosure of— 
(a) any such communication made in furtherance of any illegal purpose; 
(b) any fact observed by any advocate, in the course of his service as such, showing that any 
crime or fraud has been committed since the commencement of his service. 
(2) It is immaterial whether the attention of such advocate referred to in the proviso to                    
sub-section (1), was or was not directed to such fact by or on behalf of his client. 
Explanation.—The obligation stated in this section continues after the professional service has 
ceased. 
Illustrations. 
(a) A, a client, says to B, an advocate— “I have committed forgery, and I wish you to defend me”. 
As the defence of a man known to be guilty is not a criminal purpose, this communication is protected 
from disclosure. 
(b) A, a client, says to B, an advocate— “I wish to obtain possession of property by the use of a 
forged deed on which I request you to sue”. This communication, being made in furtherance of a criminal 
purpose, is not protected from disclosure. 
(c) A, being charged with embezzlement, retains B, an advocate, to defend him. In the course of the 
proceedings, B observes that an entry has been made in A’s account book, charging A with the sum said 
to have been embezzled, which entry was not in the book at the commencement of his professional 
service. This being a fact observed by B in the course of his service, showing that a fraud has been 
committed since the commencement of the proceedings, it is not protected from disclosure. 
(3) The provisions of this section shall apply to interpreters, and the clerks or employees of 
advocates. 
133. Privilege not waived by volunteering evidence.—If any party to a suit gives evidence therein 
at his own instance or otherwise, he shall not be deemed to have consented thereby to such disclosure as 
is mentioned in section 132; and, if any party to a suit or proceeding calls any such advocate, as a 
witness, he shall be deemed to have consented to such disclosure only if he questions such advocate, on 
matters which, but for such question, he would not be at liberty to disclose. 
134. Confidential communication with legal advisers.—No one shall be compelled to disclose to 
the Court any confidential communication which has taken place between him and his legal adviser, 
unless he offers himself as a witness, in which case he may be compelled to disclose any such 
communications as may appear to the Court necessary to be known in order to explain any evidence 
which he has given, but no others. 
135. Production of title-deeds of witness not a party.—No witness who is not a party to a suit shall 
be compelled to produce his title-deeds to any property, or any document in virtue of which he holds any 
property as pledgee or mortgagee or any document the production of which might tend to criminate him, 
unless he has agreed in writing to produce them with the person seeking the production of such deeds or 
some person through whom he claims. 
136. Production of documents or electronic records which another person, having possession, 
could refuse to produce.—No one shall be compelled to produce documents in his possession or 
42 
electronic records under his control, which any other person would be entitled to refuse to produce if they 
were in his possession or control, unless such last-mentioned person consents to their production. 
137. Witness not excused from answering on ground that answer will criminate.—A witness 
shall not be excused from answering any question as to any matter relevant to the matter in issue in any 
suit or in any civil or criminal proceeding, upon the ground that the answer to such question will 
criminate, or may tend directly or indirectly to criminate, such witness, or that it will expose, or tend 
directly or indirectly to expose, such witness to a penalty or forfeiture of any kind: 
Provided that no such answer, which a witness shall be compelled to give, shall subject him to any 
arrest or prosecution, or be proved against him in any criminal proceeding, except a prosecution forgiving 
false evidence by such answer. 
138. Accomplice.—An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person; and a 
conviction is not illegal if it proceeds upon the corroborated testimony of an accomplice. 
139. Number of witnesses.—No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the 
proof of any fact. 
CHAPTER X 
OF EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES 
140. Order of production and examination of witnesses.—The order in which witnesses are 
produced and examined shall be regulated by the law and practice for the time being relating to civil and 
criminal procedure respectively, and, in the absence of any such law, by the discretion of the Court. 
141. Judge to decide as to admissibility of evidence.—(1) When either party proposes to give 
evidence of any fact, the Judge may ask the party proposing to give the evidence in what manner the 
alleged fact, if proved, would be relevant; and the Judge shall admit the evidence if he thinks that the fact, 
if proved, would be relevant, and not otherwise. 
(2) If the fact proposed to be proved is one of which evidence is admissible only upon proof of some 
other fact, such last mentioned fact must be proved before evidence is given of the fact first mentioned, 
unless the party undertakes to give proof of such fact, and the Court is satisfied with such undertaking. 
(3) If the relevancy of one alleged fact depends upon another alleged fact being first proved, the 
Judge may, in his discretion, either permit evidence of the first fact to be given before the second fact is 
proved, or require evidence to be given of the second fact before evidence is given of the first fact. 
Illustrations. 
(a) It is proposed to prove a statement about a relevant fact by a person alleged to be dead, which 
statement is relevant under section 26. The fact that the person is dead must be proved by the person 
proposing to prove the statement, before evidence is given of the statement. 
(b) It is proposed to prove, by a copy, the contents of a document said to be lost. The fact that the 
original is lost must be proved by the person proposing to produce the copy, before the copy is produced. 
(c) A is accused of receiving stolen property knowing it to have been stolen. It is proposed to prove 
that he denied the possession of the property. The relevancy of the denial depends on the identity of the 
property. The Court may, in its discretion, either require the property to be identified before the denial of 
the possession is proved, or permit the denial of the possession to be proved before the property is 
identified. 
(d) It is proposed to prove a fact A which is said to have been the cause or effect of a fact in issue. 
There are several intermediate facts B, C and D which must be shown to exist before the fact A can be 
regarded as the cause or effect of the fact in issue. The Court may either permit A to be proved before B, 
C or D is proved, or may require proof of B, C and D before permitting proof of A. 
142. Examination of witnesses.—(1) The examination of a witness by the party who calls him shall 
be called his examination-in-chief. 
(2) The examination of a witness by the adverse party shall be called his cross-examination. 
43 
(3) The examination of a witness, subsequent to the cross-examination, by the party who called him, 
shall be called his re-examination. 
143. Order of examinations.—(1) Witnesses shall be first examined-in-chief, then (if the adverse 
party so desires) cross-examined, then (if the party calling him so desires) re-examined. 
(2) The examination-in-chief and cross-examination must relate to relevant facts, but the                     
cross-examination need not be confined to the facts to which the witness testified on his examination-in
chief. 
(3) The re-examination shall be directed to the explanation of matters referred to in                     
cross-examination; and, if new matter is, by permission of the Court, introduced in re-examination, the 
adverse party may further cross-examine upon that matter. 
144. Cross-examination of person called to produce a document.—A person summoned to 
produce a document does not become a witness by the mere fact that he produces it, and cannot be                 
cross-examined unless and until he is called as a witness. 
145. Witnesses to character.—Witnesses to character may be cross-examined and re-examined. 
146. Leading questions.—(1) Any question suggesting the answer which the person putting it 
wishes or expects to receive, is called a leading question. 
(2) Leading questions must not, if objected to by the adverse party, be asked in an                   
examination-in-chief, or in a re-examination, except with the permission of the Court. 
(3) The Court shall permit leading questions as to matters which are introductory or undisputed, or 
which have, in its opinion, been already sufficiently proved. 
(4) Leading questions may be asked in cross-examination. 
147. Evidence as to matters in writing.—Any witness may be asked, while under examination, 
whether any contract, grant or other disposition of property, as to which he is giving evidence, was not 
contained in a document, and if he says that it was, or if he is about to make any statement as to the 
contents of any document, which, in the opinion of the Court, ought to be produced, the adverse party 
may object to such evidence being given until such document is produced, or until facts have been proved 
which entitle the party who called the witness to give secondary evidence of it. 
Explanation.—A witness may give oral evidence of statements made by other persons about the 
contents of documents if such statements are in themselves relevant facts. 
Illustration. 
The question is, whether A assaulted B. C deposes that he heard A say to D— “B wrote a letter 
accusing me of theft, and I will be revenged on him”. This statement is relevant, as showing A's motive 
for the assault, and evidence may be given of it, though no other evidence is given about the letter. 
148. Cross-examination as to previous statements in writing.—A witness may be cross-examined 
as to previous statements made by him in writing or reduced into writing, and relevant to matters in 
question, without such writing being shown to him, or being proved; but, if it is intended to contradict 
him by the writing, his attention must, before the writing can be proved, be called to those parts of it 
which are to be used for the purpose of contradicting him. 
149. Questions lawful in cross-examination.—When a witness is cross-examined, he may, in 
addition to the questions hereinbefore referred to, be asked any questions which tend— 
(a) to test his veracity; or 
(b) to discover who he is and what is his position in life; or 
(c) to shake his credit, by injuring his character, although the answer to such questions might tend 
directly or indirectly to criminate him, or might expose or tend directly or indirectly to expose him to 
a penalty or forfeiture: 
44 
Provided that in a prosecution for an offence under section 64, section 65, section 66,                 
section 67, section 68, section 69, section 70 or section 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or for 
attempt to commit any such offence, where the question of consent is an issue, it shall not be permissible 
to adduce evidence or to put questions in the cross-examination of the victim as to the general immoral 
character, or previous sexual experience, of such victim with any person for proving such consent or the 
quality of consent. 
150. When witness to be compelled to answer.—If any such question relates to a matter relevant to 
the suit or proceeding, the provisions of section 137 shall apply thereto. 
151. Court to decide when question shall be asked and when witness compelled to                       
answer.—(1) If any such question relates to a matter not relevant to the suit or proceeding, except in so 
far as it affects the credit of the witness by injuring his character, the Court shall decide whether or not 
the witness shall be compelled to answer it, and may, if it thinks fit, warn the witness that he is not 
obliged to answer it. 
(2) In exercising its discretion, the Court shall have regard to the following considerations,                 
namely:— 
(a) such questions are proper if they are of such a nature that the truth of the imputation conveyed 
by them would seriously affect the opinion of the Court as to the credibility of the witness on the 
matter to which he testifies; 
(b) such questions are improper if the imputation which they convey relates to matters so remote 
in time, or of such a character, that the truth of the imputation would not affect, or would affect in a 
slight degree, the opinion of the Court as to the credibility of the witness on the matter to which he 
testifies; 
(c) such questions are improper if there is a great disproportion between the importance of the 
imputation made against the witness's character and the importance of his evidence; 
(d) the Court may, if it sees fit, draw, from the witness’s refusal to answer, the inference that the 
answer if given would be unfavourable. 
152. Question not to be asked without reasonable grounds.—No such question as is referred to in 
section 151 ought to be asked, unless the person asking it has reasonable grounds for thinking that the 
imputation which it conveys is well-founded. 
Illustrations. 
(a) An advocate is instructed by another advocate that an important witness is a dacoit. This is a 
reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a dacoit. 
(b) An advocate is informed by a person in Court that an important witness is a dacoit. The 
informant, on being questioned by the advocate, gives satisfactory reasons for his statement. This is a 
reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a dacoit. 
(c) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, is asked at random whether he is a dacoit. There 
are here no reasonable grounds for the question. 
(d) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, being questioned as to his mode of life and 
means of living, gives unsatisfactory answers. This may be a reasonable ground for asking him if he is a 
dacoit. 
153. Procedure of Court in case of question being asked without reasonable                 
grounds.—If the Court is of opinion that any such question was asked without reasonable grounds, it 
may, if it was asked by any advocate, report the circumstances of the case to the High Court or other 
authority to which such advocate is subject in the exercise of his profession. 
154. Indecent and scandalous questions.—The Court may forbid any questions or inquiries 
which it regards as indecent or scandalous, although such questions or inquiries may have some bearing 
45 
on the questions before the Court, unless they relate to facts in issue, or to matters necessary to be known 
in order to determine whether or not the facts in issue existed. 
155. Questions intended to insult or annoy.—The Court shall forbid any question which 
appears to it to be intended to insult or annoy, or which, though proper in itself, appears to the Court 
needlessly offensive in form. 
156. Exclusion of evidence to contradict answers to questions testing veracity.—When a 
witness has been asked and has answered any question which is relevant to the inquiry only in so far as it 
tends to shake his credit by injuring his character, no evidence shall be given to contradict him; but, if he 
answers falsely, he may afterwards be charged with giving false evidence. 
Exception 1.—If a witness is asked whether he has been previously convicted of any crime and 
denies it, evidence may be given of his previous conviction. 
Exception 2.—If a witness is asked any question tending to impeach his impartiality, and answers it 
by denying the facts suggested, he may be contradicted. 
Illustrations. 
(a) A claim against an underwriter is resisted on the ground of fraud. The claimant is asked whether, 
in a former transaction, he had not made a fraudulent claim. He denies it. Evidence is offered to show that 
he did make such a claim. The evidence is inadmissible. 
(b) A witness is asked whether he was not dismissed from a situation for dishonesty. He denies it. 
Evidence is offered to show that he was dismissed for dishonesty. The evidence is not admissible. 
(c) A affirms that on a certain day he saw B at Goa. A is asked whether he himself was not on that 
day at Varanasi. He denies it. Evidence is offered to show that A was on that day at Varanasi. The 
evidence is admissible, not as contradicting A on a fact which affects his credit, but as contradicting the 
alleged fact that B was seen on the day in question in Goa. In each of these cases, the witness might, if his 
denial was false, be charged with giving false evidence. 
(d) A is asked whether his family has not had a blood feud with the family of B against whom he 
gives evidence. He denies it. He may be contradicted on the ground that the question tends to impeach his 
impartiality. 
157.  Question by party to his own witness.—(1) The Court may, in its discretion, permit the 
person who calls a witness to put any question to him which might be put in cross-examination by the 
adverse party. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall disentitle the person so permitted under sub-section (1), to rely on 
any part of the evidence of such witness. 
158. Impeaching credit of witness.—The credit of a witness may be impeached in the following 
ways by the adverse party, or, with the consent of the Court, by the party who calls him— 
(a) by the evidence of persons who testify that they, from their knowledge of the witness, believe 
him to be unworthy of credit; 
(b) by proof that the witness has been bribed, or has accepted the offer of a bribe, or has received 
any other corrupt inducement to give his evidence; 
(c) by proof of former statements inconsistent with any part of his evidence which is liable to be 
contradicted. 
Explanation.—A witness declaring another witness to be unworthy of credit may not, upon his 
examination-in-chief, give reasons for his belief, but he may be asked his reasons in cross-examination, 
and the answers which he gives cannot be contradicted, though, if they are false, he may afterwards be 
charged with giving false evidence. 
Illustrations. 
46 
(a) A sues B for the price of goods sold and delivered to B. C says that he delivered the goods to B. 
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, he said that he had not delivered goods to B. 
The evidence is admissible. 
(b) A is accused of the murder of B. C says that B, when dying, declared that A had given B the 
wound of which he died. Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, C said that B, when 
dying, did not declare that A had given B the wound of which he died. The evidence is admissible. 
159. Questions tending to corroborate evidence of relevant fact, admissible.—When a 
witness whom it is intended to corroborate gives evidence of any relevant fact, he may be questioned as 
to any other circumstances which he observed at or near to the time or place at which such relevant fact 
occurred, if the Court is of opinion that such circumstances, if proved, would corroborate the testimony of 
the witness as to the relevant fact which he testifies. 
Illustration. 
A, an accomplice, gives an account of a robbery in which he took part. He describes various incidents 
unconnected with the robbery which occurred on his way to and from the place where it was committed. 
Independent evidence of these facts may be given in order to corroborate his evidence as to the robbery 
itself. 
160. Former statements of witness may be proved to corroborate later testimony as to 
same fact.—In order to corroborate the testimony of a witness, any former statement made by such 
witness relating to the same fact, at or about the time when the fact took place, or before any authority 
legally competent to investigate the fact, may be proved. 
161. What matters may be proved in connection with proved statement relevant under 
section 26 or 27.—Whenever any statement, relevant under section 26 or 27, is proved, all matters may 
be proved either in order to contradict or to corroborate it, or in order to impeach or confirm the credit of 
the person by whom it was made, which might have been proved if that person had been called as a 
witness and had denied upon cross-examination the truth of the matter suggested. 
162. Refreshing memory.—(1) A witness may, while under examination, refresh his memory by 
referring to any writing made by himself at the time of the transaction concerning which he is questioned, 
or so soon afterwards that the Court considers it likely that the transaction was at that time fresh in his 
memory: 
Provided that the witness may also refer to any such writing made by any other person, and read by 
the witness within the time aforesaid, if when he read it, he knew it to be correct. 
(2) Whenever a witness may refresh his memory by reference to any document, he may, with the 
permission of the Court, refer to a copy of such document: 
Provided that the Court be satisfied that there is sufficient reason for the non-production of the 
original: 
Provided further that an expert may refresh his memory by reference to professional treatises. 
163. Testimony to facts stated in document mentioned in section 162.—A witness may also 
testify to facts mentioned in any such document as is mentioned in section 162, although he has no 
specific recollection of the facts themselves, if he is sure that the facts were correctly recorded in the 
document. 
Illustration. 
A book-keeper may testify to facts recorded by him in books regularly kept in the course of business, 
if he knows that the books were correctly kept, although he has forgotten the particular transactions 
entered. 
164. Right of adverse party as to writing used to refresh memory.—Any writing referred to 
under the provisions of the two last preceding sections shall be produced and shown to the adverse party 
if he requires it; such party may, if he pleases, cross-examine the witness thereupon. 
47 
165. Production of documents.—(1) A witness summoned to produce a document shall, if it is in 
his possession or power, bring it to Court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its 
production or to its admissibility: 
Provided that the validity of any such objection shall be decided on by the Court. 
(2) The Court, if it sees fit, may inspect the document, unless it refers to matters of State, or take 
other evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility. 
(3) If for such a purpose it is necessary to cause any document to be translated, the Court may, if it 
thinks fit, direct the translator to keep the contents secret, unless the document is to be given in evidence 
and, if the interpreter disobeys such direction, he shall be held to have committed an offence 
under section 198 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 
Provided that no Court shall require any communication between the Ministers and the President of 
India to be produced before it. 
166. Giving, as evidence, of document called for and produced on notice.—When a party 
calls for a document which he has given the other party notice to produce, and such document is 
produced and inspected by the party calling for its production, he is bound to give it as evidence if the 
party producing it requires him to do so. 
167. Using, as evidence, of document production of which was refused on                     
notice.— When a party refuses to produce a document which he has had notice to produce, he cannot 
afterwards use the document as evidence without the consent of the other party or the order of the Court. 
Illustration. 
A sues B on an agreement and gives B notice to produce it. At the trial, A calls for the document and 
B refuses to produce it. A gives secondary evidence of its contents. B seeks to produce the document 
itself to contradict the secondary evidence given by A, or in order to show that the agreement is not 
stamped. He cannot do so. 
168. Judge’s power to put questions or order production.—The Judge may, in order to 
discover or obtain proof of relevant facts, ask any question he considers necessary, in any form, at any 
time, of any witness, or of the parties about any fact; and may order the production of any document or 
thing; and neither the parties nor their representatives shall be entitled to make any objection to any such 
question or order, nor, without the leave of the Court, to cross-examine any witness upon any answer 
given in reply to any such question: 
Provided that the judgment must be based upon facts declared by this Adhiniyam to be relevant, and 
duly proved: 
Provided further that this section shall not authorise any Judge to compel any witness to answer any 
question, or to produce any document which such witness would be entitled to refuse to answer or 
produce under sections 127 to 136, both inclusive, if the question were asked or the document were called 
for by the adverse party; nor shall the Judge ask any question which it would be improper for any other 
person to ask under section 151 or 152; nor shall he dispense with primary evidence of any document, 
except in the cases hereinbefore excepted. 
CHAPTER XI 
OF IMPROPER ADMISSION AND REJECTION OF EVIDENCE 
169. No new trial for improper admission or rejection of evidence.—The improper 
admission or rejection of evidence shall not be ground of itself for a new trial or reversal of any decision 
in any case, if it shall appear to the Court before which such objection is raised that, independently of the 
evidence objected to and admitted, there was sufficient evidence to justify the decision, or that, if the 
rejected evidence had been received, it ought not to have varied the decision. 
48 
CHAPTER XII 
REPEAL AND SAVINGS 
170. Repeal and savings.—(1) The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, if, immediately before the date on which this Adhiniyam comes into 
force, there is any application, trial, inquiry, investigation, proceeding or appeal pending, then, such 
application, trial, inquiry, investigation, proceeding or appeal shall be dealt with under the provisions of 
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), as in force immediately before such commencement, as if this 
Adhiniyam had not come into force.