 THE BHARATIYA NAGARIK SURAKSHA SANHITA, 2023
 A
 BILL
 to consolidate and amend the law relating to Criminal Procedure.
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
 follows:—
 CHAPTER I
 PRELIMINARY
 5
 10
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
 (2) The provisions of this Sanhita, other than those relating to Chapters IX, XI and
 XII thereof, shall not apply—
 (a) to the State of Nagaland;
 (b) to the tribal areas,
 but the concerned State Government may, by notification, apply such provisions or any of
 them to the whole or part of the State of Nagaland or such tribal areas, as the case may be,
 with such supplemental, incidental or consequential modifications, as may be specified in
 the notification.
 Short title,
 extent and
 commencement.
2
 Explanation.—In this section, "tribal areas" means the territories which immediately
 before the 21st day of January, 1972, were included in the tribal areas of Assam, as referred
 to in paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, other than those within the
 local limits of the municipality of Shillong.
 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
 in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 Definitions.
 2. (1) In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 (a) "audio-video electronic" means shall include use of any communication
 device for the purposes of video conferencing, recording of processes of identification,
 search and seizure or evidence, transmission of electronic communication and for
 such other purposes and by such other means as the State Government may, by rules
 provide;";
 (b) "bailable offence" means an offence which is shown as bailable in the First
 Schedule, or which is made bailable by any other law for the time being in force; and
 "non-bailable offence" means any other offence;
 (c) "charge" includes any head of charge when the charge contains more heads
 than one;
 (d) "cognizable offence" means an offence for which, and "cognizable case"
 means a case in which, a police officer may, in accordance with the First Schedule or
 under any other law for the time being in force, arrest without warrant;
 (e) "complaint" means any allegation made orally or in writing to a Magistrate,
 with a view to his taking action under this Sanhita, that some person, whether known
 or unknown, has committed an offence, but does not include a police report.
 Explanation.—A report made by a police officer in a case which discloses,
 after investigation, the commission of a non-cognizable offence shall be deemed to be
 a complaint; and the police officer by whom such report is made shall be deemed to be
 the complainant;
 (f) "electronic communication" means the communication of any written, verbal,
 pictorial information or video content transmitted (whether from one person to another,
 from one device to another or from a person to a device or from a device to a person)
 by means of an electronic device including but not limited to—a telephone, a mobile
 or cellular phone, or other wireless telecommunication device, or a computer, or
 audio-video players and cameras or any other electronic device or electronic form as
 may be specified by notification, by the Central Government.
 (g) "High Court" means,—
 (i) in relation to any State, the High Court for that State;
 (ii) in relation to a Union territory to which the jurisdiction of the High
 Court for a State has been extended by law, that High Court;
 (iii) in relation to any other Union territory, the highest Court of criminal
 appeal for that territory other than the Supreme Court of India;
 (h) "India" means the territories to which this Sanhita extends;
 (i) "inquiry" means every inquiry, other than a trial, conducted under this Sanhita
 by a Magistrate or Court;
 (j) "investigation" includes all the proceedings under this Sanhita for the
 collection of evidence conducted by a police officer or by any person (other than a
 Magistrate) who is authorised by a Magistrate in this behalf.
 Explanation.—Where any of the provisions of a special Act are inconsistent
 with the provisions of this Sanhita, the provisions of the special Act shall prevail.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
3
 (k) "judicial proceeding" includes any proceeding in the course of which
 evidence is or may be legally taken on oath;
 5
 10
 1 of 1871.
 2 of 2000.
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (l) "local jurisdiction", in relation to a Court or Magistrate, means the local area
 within which the Court or Magistrate may exercise all or any of its or his powers under
 this Sanhita and such local area may comprise the whole of the State, or any part of
 the State, as the State Government may, by notification, specify;
 (m) "non-cognizable offence" means an offence for which, and "non-cognizable
 case" means a case in which, a police officer has no authority to arrest without
 warrant;
 (n) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
 (o) "offence" means any act or omission made punishable by any law for the
 time being in force and includes any act in respect of which a complaint may be made
 under section 20 of the Cattle Trespass Act, 1871;
 (p) "officer in charge of a police station" includes, when the officer in charge of
 the police station is absent from the station-house or unable from illness or other
 cause to perform his duties, the police officer present at the station-house who is next
 in rank to such officer and is above the rank of constable or, when the State Government
 so directs, any other police officer so present;
 (q) "place" includes a house, building, tent, vehicle and vessel;
 (r) "pleader", when used with reference to any proceeding in any Court, means
 an advocate or a person authorised by or under any law for the time being in force, to
 practise in such Court, and includes any other person appointed with the permission
 of the Court to act in such proceeding;
 (s) "police report" means a report forwarded by a police officer to a Magistrate
 under sub-section (1) of section 176;
 (t) "police station" means any post or place declared generally or specially by
 the State Government, to be a police station, and includes any local area specified by
 the State Government in this behalf;
 (u) "Public Prosecutor" means any person appointed under section 18, and
 includes any person acting under the directions of a Public Prosecutor;
 (v) "sub-division" means a sub-division of a district;
 (w) "summons-case" means a case relating to an offence, and not being a
 warrant-case;
 (x) "victim" means a person who has suffered any loss or injury caused by
 reason of the act or omission for which the accused person has been charged and
 includes the guardian or legal heir of such victim;
 (y) "warrant-case" means a case relating to an offence punishable with death,
 imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years;
 (2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Bharatiya
 Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and Information Technology Act, 2000 have the meanings respectively
 assigned to them in that Act and Sanhita;
 3. (1) Unless the context otherwise requires, any reference in any existing law, to a
 Magistrate, Magistrate of the first class or a Magistrate of the second class shall, in relation
 to any area, be construed as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Judicial
 Magistrate of the second class, as the case may be, exercising jurisdiction in such area.
 Construction
 of references.
4
 (2) Where, under any law, other than this Sanhita, the functions exercisable by a
 Magistrate relate to matters,—
 (a) which involve the appreciation or shifting of evidence or the formulation of
 any decision which exposes any person to any punishment or penalty or detention in
 custody pending investigation, inquiry or trial or would have the effect of sending
 him for trial before any Court, they shall, subject to the provisions of this Sanhita, be
 exercisable by a Judicial Magistrate; or
 (b) which are administrative or executive in nature, such as, the granting of a
 licence, the suspension or cancellation of a licence, sanctioning a prosecution or
 withdrawing from a prosecution, they shall, subject to the provisions of clause (a) be
 exercisable by an Executive Magistrate.
 Trial of
 offences under
 Bharatiya
 Nyaya Sanhita
 and other laws.
 Saving.
 Classes of
 Criminal
 Courts.
 Territorial
 divisions.
 Court of
 Session.
 4. (1) All offences under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall be investigated,
 inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with according to the provisions hereinafter
 contained.
 (2) All offences under any other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and
 otherwise dealt with according to the same provisions, but subject to any enactment for the
 time being in force regulating the manner or place of investigating, inquiring into, trying or
 otherwise dealing with such offences.
 5. Nothing contained in this Sanhita shall, in the absence of a specific provision to
 the contrary, affect any special or local law for the time being in force, or any special
 jurisdiction or power conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by any other
 law for the time being in force.
 CHAPTER II
 CONSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL COURTS AND OFFICES
 6. Besides the High Courts and the Courts constituted under any law, other than this
 Sanhita, there shall be, in every State, the following classes of Criminal Courts, namely:—
 (i) Courts of Session;
 (ii) Judicial Magistrates of the first class;
 (iii) Judicial Magistrates of the second class; and
 (iv) Executive Magistrates.
 7. (1) Every State shall be a sessions division or shall consist of sessions divisions;
 and every sessions divisions shall, for the purposes of this Sanhita, be a district or consist
 of districts.
 (2) The State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, alter the limits
 or the number of such divisions and districts.
 (3) The State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, divide any
 district into sub-divisions and may alter the limits or the number of such sub-divisions.
 (4) The sessions divisions, districts and sub-divisions existing in a State at the
 commencement of this Sanhita, shall be deemed to have been formed under this section.
 8. (1) The State Government shall establish a Court of Session for every sessions
 division.
 (2) Every Court of Session shall be presided over by a Judge, to be appointed by the
 High Court.
 (3) The High Court may also appoint Additional Sessions Judges to exercise jurisdiction
 in a Court of Session.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
5
 (4) The Sessions Judge of one sessions division may be appointed by the High Court
 to be also an Additional Sessions Judge of another division, and in such case, he may sit for
 the disposal of cases at such place or places in the other division as the High Court may
 direct.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 (5) Where the office of the Sessions Judge is vacant, the High Court may make
 arrangements for the disposal of any urgent application which is, or may be, made or
 pending before such Court of Session by an Additional Sessions Judge or if there be no
 Additional Sessions Judge, by a Chief Judicial Magistrate, in the sessions division; and
 every such Judge or Magistrate shall have jurisdiction to deal with any such application.
 (6) The Court of Session shall ordinarily hold its sitting at such place or places as the
 High Court may, by notification, specify; but, if, in any particular case, the Court of Session
 is of opinion that it will tend to the general convenience of the parties and witnesses to hold
 its sittings at any other place in the sessions division, it may, with the consent of the
 prosecution and the accused, sit at that place for the disposal of the case or the examination
 of any witness or witnesses therein.
 (7) The Sessions Judge may, from time to time, make orders consistent with this
 Sanhita, as to the distribution of business among such Additional Sessions Judges.
 (8) The Sessions Judge may also make provision for the disposal of any urgent
 application, in the event of his absence or inability to act, by an Additional Sessions Judge
 or if there be no Additional Sessions Judge, by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and such
 Judge or Magistrate shall be deemed to have jurisdiction to deal with any such application.
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this Sanhita, "appointment" does not include the
 first appointment, posting or promotion of a person by the Government to any Service, or
 post in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State, where under any law, such
 appointment, posting or promotion is required to be made by the Government.
 9. (1) In every district there shall be established as many Courts of Judicial Magistrates
 of the first class and of the second class, and at such places, as the State Government may,
 after consultation with the High Court, by notification, specify:
 Provided that the State Government may, after consultation with the High Court,
 establish, for any local area, one or more Special Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first
 class or of the second class to try any particular case or particular class of cases, and where
 any such Special Court is established, no other Court of Magistrate in the local area shall
 have jurisdiction to try any case or class of cases for the trial of which such Special Court
 of Judicial Magistrate has been established.
 (2) The presiding officers of such Courts shall be appointed by the High Court.
 (3) The High Court may, whenever it appears to it to be expedient or necessary, confer
 the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or of the second class on any member
 of the Judicial Service of the State, functioning as a Judge in a Civil Court.
 10. (1) In every district, the High Court shall appoint a Judicial Magistrate of the first
 class to be the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
 (2) The High Court may appoint any Judicial Magistrate of the first class to be an
 Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have all or any of the
 powers of a Chief Judicial Magistrate under this Sanhita or under any other law for the time
 being in force as the High Court may direct.
 (3) The High Court may designate any Judicial Magistrate of the first class in any
 sub-division as the Sub-divisional Judicial Magistrate and relieve him of the responsibilities
 specified in this section as occasion requires.
 (4) Subject to the general control of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, every Sub-divisional
 Judicial Magistrate shall also have and exercise, such powers of supervision and control
 over the work of the Judicial Magistrates (other than Additional Chief Judicial Magistrates)
 in the sub-division as the High Court may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf.
 Courts of
 Judicial
 Magistrates.
 Chief Judicial
 Magistrate and
 Additional
 Chief Judicial
 Magistrate,
 etc.
6
 Special Judicial
 Magistrates.
 Local
 jurisdiction of
 Judicial
 Magistrates.
 Subordination
 of Judicial
 Magistrates.
 Executive
 Magistrates.
 11. (1) The High Court may, if requested by the Central or State Government so to do,
 confer upon any person who holds or has held any post under the Government, all or any
 of the powers conferred or conferrable by or under this Sanhita on a Judicial Magistrate of
 the first class or of the second class, in respect to particular cases or to particular classes of
 cases, in any local area:
 Provided that no such power shall be conferred on a person unless he possesses
 such qualification or experience in relation to legal affairs as the High Court may, by rules,
 specify.
 (2) Such Magistrates shall be called Special Judicial Magistrates and shall be appointed
 for such term, not exceeding one year at a time, as the High Court may, by general or special
 order, direct.
 12. (1) Subject to the control of the High Court, the Chief Judicial Magistrate may,
 from time to time, define the local limits of the areas within which the Magistrates appointed
 under section 9 or under section 11 may exercise all or any of the powers with which they
 may respectively be invested under this Sanhita:
 Provided that the Court of Special Judicial Magistrate may hold its sitting at any place
 within the local area for which it is established.
 (2) Except as otherwise provided by such definition, the jurisdiction and powers of
 every such Magistrate shall extend throughout the district.
 (3) Where the local jurisdiction of a Magistrate appointed under section 9 or section 11
 extends to an area beyond the district in which he ordinarily holds Court, any reference in
 this Sanhita to the Court of Session or Chief Judicial Magistrate shall, in relation to such
 Magistrate, throughout the area within his local jurisdiction, be construed, unless the
 context otherwise requires, as a reference to the Court of Session or Chief Judicial Magistrate,
 as the case may be, exercising jurisdiction in relation to the said district.
 13. (1) Every Chief Judicial Magistrate shall be subordinate to the Sessions Judge;
 and every other Judicial Magistrate shall, subject to the general control of the Sessions
 Judge, be subordinate to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
 (2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may, from time to time, make rules or give special
 orders, consistent with this Sanhita, as to the distribution of business among the Judicial
 Magistrates subordinate to him.
 14. (1) In every district, the State Government may appoint as many persons as it
 thinks fit to be Executive Magistrates and shall appoint one of them to be the District
 Magistrate.
 (2) The State Government may appoint any Executive Magistrate to be an Additional
 District Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have such of the powers of a District
 Magistrate under this Sanhita or under any other law for the time being in force as may be
 directed by the State Government.
 (3) Whenever, in consequence of the office of a District Magistrate becoming vacant,
 any officer succeeds temporarily to the executive administration of the district, such officer
 shall, pending the orders of the State Government, exercise all the powers and perform all
 the duties respectively conferred and imposed by this Sanhita on the District Magistrate.
 (4) The State Government may place an Executive Magistrate in charge of a
 sub-division and may relieve him of the charge as occasion requires; and the Magistrate so
 placed in charge of a sub-division shall be called the Sub-divisional Magistrate.
 (5) The State Government may, by general or special order and subject to such control
 and directions as it may deem fit to impose, delegate its powers under sub-section (4) to the
 District Magistrate.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
7
 (6) Nothing in this section shall preclude the State Government from conferring,
 under any law for the time being in force, on a Commissioner of Police all or any of the
 powers of an Executive Magistrate.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 15. The State Government may appoint, for such term as it may think fit, Executive
 Magistrates or any police officer not below the rank of Superintendent of Police or equivalent,
 to be known as Special Executive Magistrates, for particular areas or for the performance of
 particular functions and confer on such Special Executive Magistrates such of the powers
 as are conferrable under this Sanhita on Executive Magistrates, as it may deem fit.
 16. (1) Subject to the control of the State Government, the District Magistrate may,
 from time to time, define the local limits of the areas within which the Executive Magistrates
 may exercise all or any of the powers with which they may be invested under this Sanhita.
 (2) Except as otherwise provided by such definition, the jurisdiction and powers of
 every such Magistrate shall extend throughout the district.
 17. (1) All Executive Magistrates shall be subordinate to the District Magistrate, and
 every Executive Magistrate (other than the Sub-divisional Magistrate) exercising powers in
 a sub-division shall also be subordinate to the Sub-divisional Magistrate, subject, however,
 to the general control of the District Magistrate.
 (2) The District Magistrate may, from time to time, make rules or give special orders,
 consistent with this Sanhita, as to the distribution or allocation of business among the
 Executive Magistrates subordinate to him.
 18. (1) For every High Court, the Central Government or the State Government shall,
 after consultation with the High Court, appoint a Public Prosecutor and may also appoint
 one or more Additional Public Prosecutors, for conducting in such Court, any prosecution,
 appeal or other proceeding on behalf of the Central Government or the State Government,
 as the case may be:
 Provided that for National Capital Territory of Delhi, the Central Government shall,
 after consultation with the High Court of Delhi, appoint the Public Prosecutor or Additional
 Public Prosecutors for the purposes of this sub-section.
 (2) The Central Government may appoint one or more Public Prosecutors for the
 purpose of conducting any case in any district or local area.
 (3) For every district, the State Government shall appoint a Public Prosecutor and may
 also appoint one or more Additional Public Prosecutors for the district:
 Provided that the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor appointed for
 one district may be appointed also to be a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public
 Prosecutor, as the case may be, for another district.
 (4) The District Magistrate shall, in consultation with the Sessions Judge, prepare a
 panel of names of persons, who are, in his opinion fit to be appointed as Public Prosecutors
 or Additional Public Prosecutors for the district.
 (5) No person shall be appointed by the State Government as the Public Prosecutor or
 Additional Public Prosecutor for the district unless his name appears in the panel of names
 prepared by the District Magistrate under sub-section (4).
 (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where in a State there
 exists a regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers, the State Government shall appoint a Public
 Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor only from among the persons constituting
 such Cadre:
 Provided that where, in the opinion of the State Government, no suitable person is
 available in such Cadre for such appointment, that Government may appoint a person as
 Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor, as the case may be, from the panel of
 names prepared by the District Magistrate under sub-section (4).
 Special
 Executive
 Magistrates.
 Local
 Jurisdiction of
 Executive
 Magistrates.
 Subordination
 of Executive
 Magistrates.
 Public
 Prosecutors.
8
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
 (a) "regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers" means a Cadre of Prosecuting Officers
 which includes therein the post of Public Prosecutor, by whatever name called, and
 which provides for promotion of Assistant Public Prosecutors, by whatever name
 called, to that post;
 (b) "Prosecuting Officer" means a person, by whatever name called, appointed
 to perform the functions of  Public Prosecutor, Special Public Prosecutor, Additional
 Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor under this Sanhita.
 (7) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional
 Public Prosecutor under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (6),
 only if he has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years.
 (8) The Central Government or the State Government may appoint, for the purposes
 of any case or class of cases, a person who has been in practice as an advocate for not less
 than ten years as a Special Public Prosecutor:
 Provided that the Court may permit the victim to engage an advocate of his choice to
 assist the prosecution under this sub-section.
 (9) For the purposes of sub-section (7) and sub-section (8), the period during which
 a person has been in practice as a pleader, or has rendered (whether before or after the
 commencement of this Sanhita) service as a Public Prosecutor or as an Additional Public
 Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor or other Prosecuting Officer, by whatever name
 called, shall be deemed to be the period during which such person has been in practice as
 an advocate.
 Assistant
 Public
 Prosecutors.
 Directorate of
 Prosecution.
 19. (1) The State Government shall appoint in every district one or more Assistant
 Public Prosecutors for conducting prosecutions in the Courts of Magistrates.
 (2) The Central Government may appoint one or more Assistant Public Prosecutors
 for the purpose of conducting any case in the Courts of Magistrates.
 (3) Without prejudice to provisions contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), where no
 Assistant Public Prosecutor is available for the purposes of any particular case, the District
 Magistrate may appoint any other person to be the Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of
 that case after giving notice of fourteen days to the State Government:
 Provided that no police officer shall be eligible to be appointed as an Assistant Public
 Prosecutor, if he—
 (a) has taken any part in the investigation into the offence with respect to
 which the accused is being prosecuted; or
 (b) is below the rank of Inspector.
 20. (1) The State Government may establish,—
 (a) a Directorate of Prosecution in the State consisting of a Director of
 Prosecution and as many Deputy Directors of Prosecution as it think fit; and
 (b) District Directorate of Prosecution in every district consisting of as many
 Deputy Directors and Assistant Directors of Prosecution, as it thinks fit.
 (2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed,—
 (a) as a Director of Prosecution or a Deputy Director of Prosecution, if he has
 been in practice as an advocate for not less than fifteen years or is or has been a
 Sessions Judge;
 (b) as an Assistant Director of Prosecution if he has been in practice as an
 advocate for not less than seven years or has been a Magistrate of the first class.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
9
 (3) The Directorate of Prosecution shall be headed by the Director of Prosecution,
 who shall function under the administrative control of the Home Department in the State.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (4) Every Deputy Director of Prosecution or Assistant Director of Prosecution shall
 be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution; and every Assistant Director of Prosecution
 shall be subordinate to the Deputy Director of Prosecution.
 (5) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor
 appointed by the State Government under sub-section (1), or sub-section (8), of section 18
 to conduct cases in the High Court shall be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution.
 (6) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor
 appointed by the State Government under sub-section (3), or as the case may be,
 sub-section (8), of section 18 to conduct cases in District Courts and every Assistant
 Public Prosecutor appointed under sub-section (1) of section 19 shall be subordinate to the
 Deputy Director of Prosecution or the Assistant Director of Prosecution.
 (7) The powers and functions of the Director of Prosecution shall be to monitor cases
 in which offences are punishable for ten years or more, or with life imprisonment, or with
 death; to expedite the proceedings and to give opinion on filing of appeals.
 (8) The powers and functions of the Deputy Director of Prosecution shall be to
 examine and scrutinise police report and monitor the cases in which offences are punishable
 for seven years or more, but less than ten years, for ensuring their expeditious disposal.
 (9) The functions of the Assistant Director of Prosecution shall be to monitor cases in
 which offences are punishable for less than seven years.
 (10) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (7), (8) and (9), the Director,
 Deputy Director or Assistant Director of Prosecution shall have the power to deal with and
 be responsible for all proceedings under this Sanhita.
 (11) The other powers and functions of the Director of Prosecution and the Deputy
 Directors of Prosecution and the areas for which each of the Deputy Directors of Prosecution
 have been appointed shall be such as the State Government may, by notification, specify.
 (12) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Advocate General for the
 State while performing the functions of a Public Prosecutor.
 CHAPTER III
 POWER OF COURTS
 21. Subject to the other provisions of this Sanhita,—
 (a) any offence under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 may be tried by—
 (i) the High Court; or
 (ii) the Court of Session; or
 (iii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in the First Schedule
 to be triable:
 Provided that any offence under section 63, section 64, section 68, section 70 or
 section 71 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall be tried as far as practicable by
 a Court presided over by a woman.
 (b) any offence under any other law shall, when any Court is mentioned in this
 behalf in such law, be tried by such Court and when no Court is so mentioned, may be
 tried by—
 (i) the High Court; or
 (ii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in the First Schedule
 to be triable.
 Courts by
 which
 offences are
 triable.
10
 Sentences
 which High
 Courts and
 Sessions Judges
 may pass.
 Sentences
 which
 Magistrates
 may pass.
 Sentence of
 imprisonment
 in default of
 fine.
 Sentence in
 cases of
 conviction of
 several
 offences at
 one trial.
 Mode of
 conferring
 powers.
 Powers of
 officers
 appointed.
 22. (1) A High Court may pass any sentence authorised by law.
 (2) A Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge may pass any sentence authorised
 by law; but any sentence of death passed by any such Judge shall be subject to confirmation
 by the High Court.
 23. (1) The Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate may pass any sentence authorised by
 law except a sentence of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term
 exceeding seven years.
 (2) The Court of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class may pass a sentence of
 imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or of fine not exceeding fifty thousand
 rupees, or of both.
 (3) The Court of Judicial Magistrate of the second class may pass a sentence of
 imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or of fine not exceeding ten thousand
 rupees, or of both.
 24. (1) The Court of a Judicial Magistrate may award such term of imprisonment in
 default of payment of fine as is authorised by law:
 Provided that the term—
 (a) is not in excess of the powers of the Judicial Magistrate under section 23;
 (b) shall not, where imprisonment has been awarded as part of the substantive
 sentence, exceed one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which the Magistrate is
 competent to inflict as punishment for the offence otherwise than as imprisonment in
 default of payment of the fine.
 (2) The imprisonment awarded under this section may be in addition to a substantive
 sentence of imprisonment for the maximum term awardable by the Magistrate under section 23.
 25. (1) When a person is convicted at one trial of two or more offences, the Court may,
 subject to the provisions of section 9 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, sentence him
 for such offences, to the several punishments prescribed therefor which such Court is
 competent to inflict and the court shall, considering the gravity of offences, order such
 punishments to run concurrently or consecutively.
 (2) In the case of consecutive sentences, it shall not be necessary for the Court by
 reason only of the aggregate punishment for the several offences being in excess of the
 punishment which it is competent to inflict on conviction of a single offence, to send the
 offender for trial before a higher Court:
 Provided that—
 (a) in no case shall such person be sentenced to imprisonment for a longer
 period than fourteen years;
 (b) the aggregate punishment shall not exceed twice the amount of punishment
 which the Court is competent to inflict for a single offence.
 (3) For the purpose of appeal by a convicted person, the aggregate of the consecutive
 sentences passed against him under this section shall be deemed to be a single sentence.
 26. (1) In conferring powers under this Sanhita, the High Court or the State Government,
 as the case may be, may, by order, empower persons specially by name or in virtue of their
 offices or classes of officials generally be their official titles.
 (2) Every such order shall take effect from the date on which it is communicated to the
 person so empowered.
 27. Whenever any person holding an office in the service of Government who has
 been invested by the High Court or the State Government with any powers under this
 Sanhita throughout any local area is appointed to an equal or higher office of the same
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
11
 nature, within a like local area under the same State Government, he shall, unless the High
 Court or the State Government, as the case may be, otherwise directs, or has otherwise
 directed, exercise the same powers in the local area in which he is so appointed.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 28. (1) The High Court or the State Government, as the case may be, may withdraw all
 or any of the powers conferred by it under this Sanhita on any person or by any officer
 subordinate to it.
 (2) Any powers conferred by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or by the District Magistrate
 may be withdrawn by the respective Magistrate by whom such powers were conferred.
 29. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Sanhita, the powers and duties of a
 Judge or Magistrate may be exercised or performed by his successor-in-office.
 (2) When there is any doubt as to who is the successor-in-office, the Sessions Judge
 shall determine by order in writing the Judge who shall, for the purposes of this Sanhita or
 of any proceedings or order thereunder, be deemed to be the successor-in-office.
 (3) When there is any doubt as to who is the successor-in-office of any Magistrate,
 the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or the District Magistrate, as the case may be, shall determine
 by order in writing the Magistrate who shall, for the purpose of this Sanhita or of any
 proceedings or order thereunder, be deemed to be the successor-in-office of such Magistrate.
 CHAPTER IV
 POWERS OF SUPERIOR OFFICERS OF POLICE AND AID TO THE MAGISTRATES AND THE POLICE
 30. Police officers superior in rank to an officer in charge of a police station may
 exercise the same powers, throughout the local area to which they are appointed, as may be
 exercised by such officer within the limits of his station.
 31. Every person is bound to assist a Magistrate or police officer reasonably demanding
 his aid—
 (a) in the taking or preventing the escape of any other person whom such
 Magistrate or police officer is authorised to arrest; or
 (b) in the prevention or suppression of a breach of the peace; or
 (c) in the prevention of any injury attempted to be committed to any public
 property.
 32. When a warrant is directed to a person other than a police officer, any other
 person may aid in the execution of such warrant, if the person to whom the warrant is
 directed be near at hand and acting in the execution of the warrant.
 33. (1) Every person, aware of the commission of, or of the intention of any other
 person to commit, any offence punishable under any of the following sections of the
 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, namely:—
 (i) sections 145 to 152 and section 156;
 (ii) sections 187 and 189;
 (iii) sections 272 to 278;
 (iv) sections 101, 102 and 103;
 (v) section 138;
 (vi) section 305;
 (vii) sections 307 to 311;
 (viii) section 314;
 Withdrawal of
 powers.
 Powers of
 Judges and
 Magistrates
 exercisable by
 their
 successors-in
office.
 Powers of
 superior
 officers of
 police.
 Public when to
 assist
 Magistrates
 and police.
 Aid to person,
 other than
 police officer,
 executing
 warrant.
 Public to give
 information
 of certain
 offences.
12
 (ix) sections 322 to 326;
 (x) section 330;
 (xi) section 329; and
 (xii) sections 176 to 180,
 shall, in the absence of any reasonable excuse, the burden of proving which excuse shall lie
 upon the person so aware, forthwith give information to the nearest Magistrate or police
 officer of such commission or intention.
 (2) For the purposes of this section, the term "offence" includes any act committed at
 any place out of India which would constitute an offence if committed in India.
 Duty of
 officers
 employed in
 connection
 with the affairs
 of a village to
 make certain
 report.
 34. (1) Every officer employed in connection with the affairs of a village and every
 person residing in a village shall forthwith communicate to the nearest Magistrate or to the
 officer in charge of the nearest police station, whichever is nearer, any information which he
 may possess respecting—
 (a) the permanent or temporary residence of any notorious receiver or vendor
 of stolen property in or near such village;
 (b) the resort to any place within, or the passage through, such village of any
 person whom he knows, or reasonably suspects, to be a thug, robber, escaped convict
 or proclaimed offender;
 (c) the commission of, or intention to commit, in or near such village any
 non-bailable offence or any offence punishable under section 187 and section 189 of
 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
 (d) the occurrence in or near such village of any sudden or unnatural death or
 of any death under suspicious circumstances or the discovery in or near such village
 of any corpse or part of a corpse, in circumstances which lead to a reasonable suspicion
 that such a death has occurred or the disappearance from such village of any person
 in circumstances which lead to a reasonable suspicion that a non-bailable offence has
 been committed in respect of such person;
 (e) the commission of, or intention to commit, at any place out of India near
 such village any act which, if committed in India, would be an offence punishable
 under any of the following sections of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, namely,
 176, 177 and 179 (both inclusive), 101, 103, 305, 307 to 311 (both inclusive), 330, 176,
 177, 178 and 179;
 (f) any matter likely to affect the maintenance of order or the prevention of crime
 or the safety of person or property respecting which the District Magistrate, by
 general or special order made with the previous sanction of the State Government,
 has directed him to communicate information.
 (2) In this section,—
 (i) "village" includes village-lands;
 (ii) the expression "proclaimed offender" includes any person proclaimed as an
 offender by any Court or authority in any territory in India to which this Sanhita does
 not extend, in respect of any act which if committed in the territories to which this
 Sanhita extends, would be an offence punishable under any of the offence punishable
 with imprisonment for ten years or more or for imprisonment of life or with death
 under Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
 (iii) the words "officer employed in connection with the affairs of the village"
 means a member of the panchayat of the village and includes the headman and every
 officer or other person appointed to perform any function connected with the
 administration of the village.