CHAPTER V
 ARREST OF PERSONS
 35. (1) Any police officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a
 warrant, arrest any person—
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable offence;
 (b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information
 has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable
 offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years
 or which may extend to seven years whether with or without fine, if the following
 conditions are satisfied, namely:—
 (i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of such complaint,
 information, or suspicion that such person has committed the said offence;
 (ii) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary—
 (a) to prevent such person from committing any further offence; or
 (b) for proper investigation of the offence; or
 (c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the offence
 to disappear or tampering with such evidence in any manner; or
 (d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or
 promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to
 dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to the police
 officer; or
 (e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court
 whenever required cannot be ensured,
 and the police officer shall record while making such arrest, his reasons in
 writing:
 Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is
 not required under the provisions of this sub-section, record the reasons in writing
 for not making the arrest;
 (c) against whom credible information has been received that he has committed
 a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
 more than seven years whether with or without fine or with death sentence and the
 police officer has reason to believe on the basis of that information that such person
 has committed the said offence;
 (d) who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this Sanhita or by
 order of the State Government; or
 (e) in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably be suspected
 to be stolen property and who may reasonably be suspected of having committed an
 offence with reference to such thing; or
 (f) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty, or who has
 escaped, or attempts to escape, from lawful custody; or
 (g) who is reasonably suspected of being a deserter from any of the Armed
 Forces of the Union; or
 (h) who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable complaint has
 been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion
 exists, of his having been concerned in, any act committed at any place out of India
 which, if committed in India, would have been punishable as an offence, and for
 When police
 may arrest
 without
 warrant.
14
 which he is, under any law relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable to be apprehended
 or detained in custody in India; or
 (i) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule made under
 sub-section (5) of section 394; or
 (j) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has been received
 from another police officer, provided that the requisition specifies the person to be
 arrested and the offence or other cause for which the arrest is to be made and it
 appears therefrom that the person might lawfully be arrested without a warrant by the
 officer who issued the requisition.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of section 39, no person concerned in a non-cognizable
 offence or against whom a complaint has been made or credible information has been
 received or reasonable suspicion exists of his having so concerned, shall be arrested except
 under a warrant or order of a Magistrate.
 (3) The police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not required
 under sub-section (1) issue a notice directing the person against whom a reasonable
 complaint has been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion
 exists that he has committed a cognizable offence, to appear before him or at such other
 place as may be specified in the notice.
 (4) Where such a notice is issued to any person, it shall be the duty of that person to
 comply with the terms of the notice.
 (5) Where such person complies and continues to comply with the notice, he shall
 not be arrested in respect of the offence referred to in the notice unless, for reasons to be
 recorded, the police officer is of the opinion that he ought to be arrested.
 (6) Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with the terms of the notice or is
 unwilling to identify himself, the police officer may, subject to such orders as may have
 been passed by a competent Court in this behalf, arrest him for the offence mentioned in the
 notice.
 (7) No arrest shall be made without prior permission of the officer not below the rank
 of Deputy Superintendent of Police in case of an offence which is punishable for less than
 three years and such person is infirm or is above sixty years of age.
 Procedure of
 arrest and
 duties of
 officer making
 arrest.
 Designated
 Police Officer.
 36. Every police officer while making an arrest shall—
 (a) bear an accurate, visible and clear identification of his name which will
 facilitate easy identification;
 (b) prepare a memorandum of arrest which shall be—
 (i) attested by at least one witness, who is a member of the family of the
 person arrested or a respectable member of the locality where the arrest is
 made;
 (ii) countersigned by the person arrested; and
 (c) inform the person arrested, unless the memorandum is attested by a member
 of his family, that he has a right to have a relative or a friend or any other person
 named by him to be informed of his arrest.
 37.  The State Government shall—
 (a) establish a Police control room in every district and at State level;
 (b) designate a police officer in every district and in every police station, not
 below the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police who shall be responsible for
 maintaining the information about the names and addresses of the persons arrested,
 nature of the offence with which charged, which shall be prominently displayed in
 any manner including in digital mode in every police station and at the district
 headquarters.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
15
 38. When any person is arrested and interrogated by the police, he shall be entitled
 to meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation, though not throughout interrogation.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 39. (1) When any person who, in the presence of a police officer, has committed or
 has been accused of committing a non-cognizable offence refuses on demand of such
 officer to give his name and residence or gives a name or residence which such officer has
 reason to believe to be false, he may be arrested by such officer in order that his name or
 residence may be ascertained.
 (2) When the true name and residence of such person have been ascertained, he shall
 be released on his executing a bond, with or without sureties, to appear before a Judicial
 Magistrate if so required:
 Provided that, if such person is not resident in India, the bond shall be secured by a
 surety or sureties resident in India.
 (3) Should If the true name and residence of such person not be ascertained within
 twenty-four hours from the time of arrest or if he fails to execute the bond, or, if so required,
 to furnish sufficient sureties, he shall forthwith be forwarded to the nearest Magistrate
 having jurisdiction.
 40. (1) Any private person may arrest or cause to be arrested any person who in his
 presence commits a non-bailable and cognizable offence, or any proclaimed offender, and,
 without unnecessary delay, but within six hours from such arrest, shall make over or cause
 to be made over any person so arrested to a police officer, or, in the absence of a police
 officer, take such person or cause him to be taken in custody to the nearest police station.
 (2) If there is reason to believe that such person comes under the provisions of
 section 35, a police officer shall take him in custody.
 (3) If there is reason to believe that he has committed a non-cognizable offence, and
 he refuses on the demand of a police officer to give his name and residence, or gives a name
 or residence which such officer has reason to believe to be false, he shall be dealt with
 under the provisions of section 39; but if there is no sufficient reason to believe that he has
 committed any offence, he shall be at once released.
 41. (1) When any offence is committed in the presence of a Magistrate, whether
 Executive or Judicial, within his local jurisdiction, he may himself arrest or order any person
 to arrest the offender, and may thereupon, subject to the provisions herein contained as to
 bail, commit the offender to custody.
 (2) Any Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, may at any time arrest or direct the
 arrest, in his presence, within his local jurisdiction, of any person for whose arrest he is
 competent at the time and in the circumstances to issue a warrant.
 42. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 39 to 41 (both inclusive), no
 member of the Armed Forces of the Union shall be arrested for anything done or purported
 to be done by him in the discharge of his official duties except after obtaining the consent
 of the Central Government.
 (2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of
 sub-section (1) shall apply to such class or category of the members of the Force charged
 with the maintenance of public order as may be specified therein, wherever they may be
 serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub-section shall apply as if for the expression
 "Central Government" occurring therein, the expression "State Government" were
 substituted.
 Right of
 arrested
 person to
 meet an
 advocate of
 his choice
 during
 interrogation.
 Arrest on
 refusal to give
 name and
 residence.
 Arrest by
 private person
 and procedure
 on such arrest.
 Arrest by
 Magistrate.
 Protection of
 members of
 the Armed
 Forces from
 arrest.
16
 Arrest how
 made.
 Search of place
 entered by
 person sought
 to be arrested.
 43. (1) In making an arrest the police officer or other person making the same shall
 actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission
 to the custody by word or action:
 Provided that where a woman is to be arrested, unless the circumstances indicate to
 the contrary, her submission to custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall be presumed
 and, unless the circumstances otherwise require or unless the police officer is a female, the
 police officer shall not touch the person of the woman for making her arrest, and give the
 information regarding such arrest and place where she is being held to any of her relatives,
 friends or such other persons as may be disclosed or mentioned by her for the purpose of
 giving such information.
 (2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him, or attempts to evade
 the arrest, such police officer or other person may use all means necessary to effect the
 arrest.
 (3) The police officer may, keeping in view the nature and gravity of the offence, use
 handcuff while effecting the arrest of a person who is a habitual, repeat offender who
 escaped from custody, who has committed offence of organised crime, offence of terrorist
 act, drug related crime, or offence of illegal possession of arms and ammunition, murder,
 rape, acid attack, counterfeiting of coins and currency notes, human trafficking, sexual
 offences against children, offences against the State, including acts endangering
 sovereignty, unity and integrity of India or economic offences.
 (4) Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death of a person who is not
 accused of an offence punishable with death or with imprisonment for life.
 (5) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after sunset and
 before sunrise, and where such exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police officer
 shall, by making a written report, obtain the prior permission of the Judicial Magistrate of
 the first class within whose local jurisdiction the offence is committed or the arrest is to be
 made.
 44. (1) If any person acting under warrant of arrest, or any police officer having
 authority to arrest, has reason to believe that the person to be arrested has entered into, or
 is within, any place, any person residing in, or being in charge of, such place shall, on
 demand of such person acting as aforesaid or such police officer, allow him free ingress
 thereto, and afford all reasonable facilities for a search therein.
 (2) If ingress to such place cannot be obtained under sub-section (1), it shall be lawful
 in any case for a person acting under a warrant and in any case in which a warrant may
 issue, but cannot be obtained without affording the person to be arrested an opportunity of
 escape, for a police officer to enter such place and search therein, and in order to effect an
 entrance into such place, to break open any outer or inner door or window of any house or
 place, whether that of the person to be arrested or of any other person, if after notification
 of his authority and purpose, and demand of admittance duly made, he cannot otherwise
 obtain admittance:
 Provided that, if any such place is an apartment in the actual occupancy of a female
 (not being the persons to be arrested) who, according to custom, does not appear in public,
 such person or police officer shall, before entering such apartment, give notice to such
 female that she is at liberty to withdraw and shall afford her every reasonable facility for
 withdrawing, and may then break open the apartment and enter it.
 (3) Any police officer or other person authorised to make an arrest may break open
 any outer or inner door or window of any house or place in order to liberate himself or any
 other person who, having lawfully entered for the purpose of making an arrest, is detained
 therein.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
17
 45. A police officer may, for the purpose of arresting without warrant any person
 whom he is authorised to arrest, pursue such person into any place in India.
 46. The person arrested shall not be subjected to more restraint than is necessary to
 prevent his escape.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 47. (1) Every police officer or other person arresting any person without warrant shall
 forthwith communicate to him full particulars of the offence for which he is arrested or other
 grounds for such arrest.
 (2) Where a police officer arrests without warrant any person other than a person
 accused of a non-bailable offence, he shall inform the person arrested that he is entitled to
 be released on bail and that he may arrange for sureties on his behalf.
 48. (1) Every police officer or other person making any arrest under this Sanhita shall
 forthwith give the information regarding such arrest and place where the arrested person is
 being held to any of his relatives, friends or such other persons as may be disclosed or
 mentioned by the arrested person for the purpose of giving such information and also to
 the designated police officer in the district.
 (2) The police officer shall inform the arrested person of his rights under
 sub-section (1) as soon as he is brought to the police station.
 (3) An entry of the fact as to who has been informed of the arrest of such person shall
 be made in a book to be kept in the police station in such form as the State Government may,
 by rules, provide.
 (4) It shall be the duty of the Magistrate before whom such arrested person is produced,
 to satisfy himself that the requirements of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) have been
 complied with in respect of such arrested person.
 49. (1) Whenever,—
 (i) a person is arrested by a police officer under a warrant which does not
 provide for the taking of bail, or under a warrant which provides for the taking of bail
 but the person arrested cannot furnish bail, and
 (ii) a person is arrested without warrant, or by a private person under a warrant,
 and cannot legally be admitted to bail, or is unable to furnish bail,
 the officer making the arrest or, when the arrest is made by a private person, the police
 officer to whom he makes over the person arrested, may search such person, and place in
 safe custody all articles, other than necessary wearing-apparel, found upon him and where
 any article is seized from the arrested person, a receipt showing the articles taken in
 possession by the police officer shall be given to such person.
 (2) Whenever it is necessary to cause a female to be searched, the search shall be
 made by another female with strict regard to decency.
 50. The police officer or other person making any arrest under this Sanhita may,
 immediately after the arrest is made, take from the person arrested any offensive weapons
 which he has about his person, and shall deliver all weapons so taken to the Court or officer
 before which or whom the officer or person making the arrest is required by this Sanhita to
 produce the person arrested.
 51. (1) When a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence of such a
 nature and alleged to have been committed under such circumstances that there are
 reasonable grounds for believing that an examination of his person will afford evidence as
 to the commission of an offence, it shall be lawful for a registered medical practitioner,
 acting at the request of any police officer, and for any person acting in good faith in his aid
 and under his direction, to make such an examination of the person arrested as is reasonably
 Pursuit of
 offenders into
 other
 jurisdictions.
 No unnecessary
 restraint.
 Person
 arrested to be
 informed of
 grounds of
 arrest and of
 right to bail.
 Obligation of
 person making
 arrest to
 inform about
 the arrest, etc.,
 to relative or
 friend.
 Search of
 arrested
 person.
 Power to seize
 offensive
 weapons.
 Examination
 of accused by
 medical
 practitioner at
 the request of
 police officer.
18
 necessary in order to ascertain the facts which may afford such evidence, and to use such
 force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose.
 (2) Whenever the person of a female is to be examined under this section, the
 examination shall be made only by, or under the supervision of, a female registered medical
 practitioner.
 (3) The registered medical practitioner shall, without any delay, forward the examination
 report to the investigating officer.
 Explanation.—In this section and in sections 52 and 53,—
 (a) "examination" shall include the examination of blood, blood stains, semen,
 swabs in case of sexual offences, sputum and sweat, hair samples and finger nail
 clippings by the use of modern and scientific techniques including DNA profiling and
 such other tests which the registered medical practitioner thinks necessary in a
 particular case;
 (b) "registered medical practitioner" means a medical practitioner who possesses
 any medical qualification recognised under the National Medical Commission Act,
 2019 and whose name has been entered in the National Medical Register or a State
 Medical Register under that Act.
 Examination
 of person
 accused of
 rape by
 medical
 practitioner.
 Examination
 of arrested
 person by
 medical
 officer.
 52. (1) When a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence of rape or an
 attempt to commit rape and there are reasonable grounds for believing that an examination
 of his person will afford evidence as to the commission of such offence, it shall be lawful for
 a registered medical practitioner employed in a hospital run by the Government or by a local
 authority and in the absence of such a practitioner within the radius of sixteen kilometers
 from the place where the offence has been committed, by any other registered medical
 practitioner, acting at the request of any police officer, and for any person acting in good
 faith in his aid and under his direction, to make such an examination of the arrested person
 and to use such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose.
 (2) The registered medical practitioner conducting such examination shall, without
 delay, examine such person and prepare a report of his examination giving the following
 particulars, namely:—
 (i) the name and address of the accused and of the person by whom he was
 brought;
 (ii) the age of the accused;
 (iii) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the accused;
 (iv) the description of material taken from the person of the accused for DNA
 profiling; and
 (v) other material particulars in reasonable detail.
 (3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.
 (4) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be
 noted in the report.
 (5) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay, forward the report to the
 investigating officer, who shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in section 193 as part
 of the documents referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (6) of that section.
 53. (1) When any person is arrested, he shall be examined by a medical officer in the
 service of the Central Government or a State Government, and in case the medical officer is
 not available, by a registered medical practitioner soon after the arrest is made:
 5
 10
 15
 30 of 2019.
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
19
 Provided that where the arrested person is a female, the examination of the body shall
 be made only by or under the supervision of a female medical officer, and in case the female
 medical officer is not available, by a female registered medical practitioner:
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 Provided further that if the registered medical practitioner is of the opinion that one
 more examination of such person is necessary, she may do so.
 (2) The medical officer or a registered medical practitioner so examining the arrested
 person shall prepare the record of such examination, mentioning therein any injuries or
 marks of violence upon the person arrested, and the approximate time when such injuries or
 marks may have been inflicted.
 (3) Where an examination is made under sub-section (1), a copy of the report of such
 examination shall be furnished by the medical officer or registered medical practitioner, as
 the case may be, to the arrested person or the person nominated by such arrested person.
 54. Where a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence and his
 identification by any other person or persons is considered necessary for the purpose of
 investigation of such offence, the Court, having jurisdiction may, on the request of the
 officer in charge of a police station, direct the person so arrested to subject himself to
 identification by any person or persons in such manner as the Court may deem fit:
 Provided that, if the person identifying the person arrested is mentally or physically
 disabled, such process of identification shall take place under the supervision of a Judicial
 Magistrate who shall take appropriate steps to ensure that such person identifies the
 person arrested using methods that person is comfortable with and the identification process
 shall be recorded by any audio-video electronic means.
 55. (1) When any officer in charge of a police station or any police officer making an
 investigation under Chapter XIII requires any officer subordinate to him to arrest without a
 warrant (otherwise than in his presence) any person who may lawfully be arrested without
 a warrant, he shall deliver to the officer required to make the arrest an order in writing,
 specifying the person to be arrested and the offence or other cause for which the arrest is
 to be made and the officer so required shall, before making the arrest, notify to the person
 to be arrested the substance of the order and, if so required by such person, shall show him
 the order.
 (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the power of a police officer to arrest a
 person under section 35.
 56. It shall be the duty of the person having the custody of an accused to take
 reasonable care of the health and safety of the accused.
 57. A police officer making an arrest without warrant shall, without unnecessary
 delay and subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail, take or send the person
 arrested before a Judicial Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, or before the officer in
 charge of a police station.
 58. No police officer shall detain in custody a person arrested without warrant for a
 longer period than under all the circumstances of the case is reasonable, and such period
 shall not, in the absence of a special order of a Magistrate under section 187, exceed
 twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to
 the Magistrate's Court, whether having jurisdiction or not.
 59. Officers in charge of police stations shall report to the District Magistrate, or, if
 he so directs, to the Sub-divisional Magistrate, the cases of all persons arrested without
 warrant, within the limits of their respective stations, whether such persons have been
 admitted to bail or otherwise.
 Identification
 of person
 arrested.
 Procedure
 when police
 officer deputes
 subordinate to
 arrest without
 warrant.
 Health and
 safety of
 arrested person.
 Person
 arrested to be
 taken before
 Magistrate or
 officer in
 charge of
 police station.
 Person
 arrested not to
 be detained
 more than
 twenty-four
 hours.
 Police to
 report
 apprehensions.
20
 Discharge of
 person
 apprehended.
 Power, on
 escape, to
 pursue and
 retake.
 Arrest to be
 made strictly
 according to
 Sanhita.
 Form of
 summons.
 Summons how
 served.
 Service of
 summons on
 corporate
 bodies, firms,
 and societies.
 60. No person who has been arrested by a police officer shall be discharged except
 on his own bond, or on bail, or under the special order of a Magistrate.
 61. (1) If a person in lawful custody escapes or is rescued, the person from whose
 custody he escaped or was rescued may immediately pursue and arrest him in any place in
 India.
 (2) The provisions of section 44 shall apply to arrests under sub-section (1) although
 the person making any such arrest is not acting under a warrant and is not a police officer
 having authority to arrest.
 62. No arrest shall be made except in accordance with the provisions of this Sanhita
 or any other law for the time being in force providing for arrest.
 CHAPTER VI
 PROCESSES TO COMPEL APPEARANCE
 A.—Summons
 63. Every summons issued by a Court under this Sanhita shall be,—
 (i) in writing, in duplicate, signed by the presiding officer of such Court or by
 such other officer as the High Court may, from time to time, by rule direct, and shall
 bear the seal of the Court; or
 (ii) in an encrypted or any other form of electronic communication and shall
 bear the image of the seal of the Court.
 64. (1) Every summons shall be served by a police officer, or subject to such rules as
 the State Government may make in this behalf, by an officer of the Court issuing it or other
 public servant:
 Provided that the police station or the registrar in the Court shall maintain a register to
 enter the address, email address, phone number and such other details as State Government
 may, by rules, provide.
 (2) The summons shall, if practicable, be served personally on the person summoned,
 by delivering or tendering to him one of the duplicates of the summons:
 Provided that summons bearing the image of Court's seal may also be served by
 electronic communication in such form and in such manner, as the State Government may,
 by rules, provide.
 (3) Every person on whom a summons is so served personally shall, if so required by
 the serving officer, sign a receipt therefor on the back of the other duplicate.
 65. (1) Service of a summons on a company or corporation may be effected by serving
 it on the Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer of the company or corporation, or by
 letter sent by registered post addressed to the Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer
 of the company or corporation in India, in which case the service shall be deemed to have
 been effected when the letter would arrive in ordinary course of post.
 Explanation.—In this section, "company" means a body corporate and "corporation"
 means an incorporated company or other body corporate or a society registered under the
 Societies Registration Act, 1860.
 (2) Service of a summons on a firm or other association of individuals may be effected
 by serving it on any partner of such firm or association, or by letter sent by registered post
 addressed to such partner, in which case the service shall be deemed to have been effected
 when the letter would arrive in ordinary course of post.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 21 of 1860.
21
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 66. Where the person summoned cannot, by the exercise of due diligence, be found,
 the summons may be served by leaving one of the duplicates for him with some adult
 member of his family residing with him, and the person with whom the summons is so left
 shall, if so required by the serving officer, sign a receipt therefor on the back of the other
 duplicate.
 Explanation.—A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this
 section.
 67. If service cannot by the exercise of due diligence be effected as provided in
 section 64, section 65 or section 66, the serving officer shall affix one of the duplicates of the
 summons to some conspicuous part of the house or homestead in which the person
 summoned ordinarily resides; and thereupon the Court, after making such inquiries as it
 thinks fit, may either declare that the summons has been duly served or order fresh service
 in such manner as it considers proper.
 68. (1) Where the person summoned is in the active service of the Government, the
 Court issuing the summons shall ordinarily send it in duplicate to the head of the office in
 which such person is employed; and such head shall thereupon cause the summons to be
 served in the manner provided by section 64, and shall return it to the Court under his
 signature with the endorsement required by that section.
 (2) Such signature shall be evidence of due service.
 69. When a Court desires that a summons issued by it shall be served at any place
 outside its local jurisdiction, it shall ordinarily send such summons in duplicate to a
 Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the person summoned resides, or is, to be there
 served.
 70. (1) When a summons issued by a Court is served outside its local jurisdiction, and
 in any case where the officer who has served a summons is not present at the hearing of the
 case, an affidavit, purporting to be made before a Magistrate, that such summons has been
 served, and a duplicate of the summons purporting to be endorsed (in the manner provided
 by section 64 or section 66) by the person to whom it was delivered or tendered or with
 whom it was left, shall be admissible in evidence, and the statements made therein shall be
 deemed to be correct unless and until the contrary is proved.
 (2) The affidavit mentioned in this section may be attached to the duplicate of the
 summons and returned to the Court.
 (3) All summons served through electronic communication under sections 64 to 71
 shall be considered as duly served and a copy of such electronic summons shall be attested
 and kept as a proof of service of summons.
 71. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding sections of this Chapter,
 a Court issuing a summons to a witness may, in addition to and simultaneously with the
 issue of such summons, direct a copy of the summons to be served by electronic
 communication or by registered post addressed to the witness at the place where he ordinarily
 resides or carries on business or personally works for gain:
 (2) When an acknowledgement purporting to be signed by the witness or an
 endorsement purporting to be made by a postal employee that the witness refused to take
 delivery of the summons has been received or on the proof of delivery of summons under
 sub-section (3) of section 70 by electronic communication to the satisfaction of the Court,
 the Court issuing summons may deem that the summons had been duly served.
 B.—Warrant of arrest
 72. (1) Every warrant of arrest issued by a Court under this Sanhita shall be in writing,
 signed by the presiding officer of such Court and shall bear the seal of the Court.
 Service when
 persons
 summoned
 cannot be
 found.
 Procedure
 when service
 cannot be
 effected as
 before
 provided.
 Service on
 Government
 servant.
 Service of
 summons
 outside local
 limits.
 Proof of
 service in such
 cases and
 when serving
 officer not
 present.
 Service of
 summons on
 witness by
 post.
 Form of warrant
 of arrest and
 duration.
22
 (2) Every such warrant shall remain in force until it is cancelled by the Court which
 issued it, or until it is executed.
 Power to
 direct security
 to be taken.
 Warrants to
 whom
 directed.
 Warrant may
 be directed to
 any person.
 Warrant
 directed to
 police officer.
 Notification
 of substance
 of warrant.
 Person
 arrested to be
 brought before
 Court without
 delay.
 Where
 warrant may
 be executed.
 73. (1) Any Court issuing a warrant for the arrest of any person may in its discretion
 direct by endorsement on the warrant that, if such person executes a bond with sufficient
 sureties for his attendance before the Court at a specified time and thereafter until otherwise
 directed by the Court, the officer to whom the warrant is directed shall take such security
 and shall release such person from custody.
 (2) The endorsement shall state—
 (a) the number of sureties;
 (b) the amount in which they and the person for whose arrest the warrant is
 issued, are to be respectively bound;
 (c) the time at which he is to attend before the Court.
 (3) Whenever security is taken under this section, the officer to whom the warrant is
 directed shall forward the bond to the Court.
 74. (1) A warrant of arrest shall ordinarily be directed to one or more police officers;
 but the Court issuing such a warrant may, if its immediate execution is necessary and no
 police officer is immediately available, direct it to any other person or persons, and such
 person or persons shall execute the same.
 (2) When a warrant is directed to more officers or persons than one, it may be executed
 by all, or by any one or more of them.
 75. (1) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class may direct a
 warrant to any person within his local jurisdiction for the arrest of any escaped convict,
 proclaimed offender or of any person who is accused of a non-bailable offence and is
 evading arrest.
 (2) Such person shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of the warrant, and shall
 execute it if the person for whose arrest it was issued, is in, or enters on, any land or other
 property under his charge.
 (3) When the person against whom such warrant is issued is arrested, he shall be
 made over with the warrant to the nearest police officer, who shall cause him to be taken
 before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, unless security is taken under section 73.
 76. A warrant directed to any police officer may also be executed by any other police
 officer whose name is endorsed upon the warrant by the officer to whom it is directed or
 endorsed.
 77. The police officer or other person executing a warrant of arrest shall notify the
 substance thereof to the person to be arrested, and, if so required, shall show him the
 warrant.
 78. The police officer or other person executing a warrant of arrest shall (subject to
 the provisions of section 73 as to security) without unnecessary delay bring the person
 arrested before the Court before which he is required by law to produce such person:
 Provided that such delay shall not, in any case, exceed twenty-four hours exclusive
 of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate's Court.
 79. A warrant of arrest may be executed at any place in India.
 80. (1) When a warrant is to be executed outside the local jurisdiction of the Court
 issuing it, such Court may, instead of directing the warrant to a police officer within its
 jurisdiction, forward it by post or otherwise to any Executive Magistrate or District
 Superintendent of Police or Commissioner of Police within the local limits of whose jurisdiction
 it is to be executed; and the Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent or Commissioner
 shall endorse his name thereon, and if practicable, cause it to be executed in the manner
 hereinbefore provided.
 (2) The Court issuing a warrant under sub-section (1) shall forward, along with the
 warrant, the substance of the information against the person to be arrested together with
 such documents, if any, as may be sufficient to enable the Court acting under section 83 to
 decide whether bail should or should not be granted to the person.
 81. (1) When a warrant directed to a police officer is to be executed beyond the local
 jurisdiction of the Court issuing the same, he shall ordinarily take it for endorsement either
 to an Executive Magistrate or to a police officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of
 a police station, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the warrant is to be executed.
 (2) Such Magistrate or police officer shall endorse his name thereon and such
 endorsement shall be sufficient authority to the police officer to whom the warrant is
 directed to execute the same, and the local police shall, if so required, assist such officer in
 executing such warrant.
 (3) Whenever there is reason to believe that the delay occasioned by obtaining the
 endorsement of the Magistrate or police officer within whose local jurisdiction the warrant
 is to be executed will prevent such execution, the police officer to whom it is directed may
 execute the same without such endorsement in any place beyond the local jurisdiction of
 the Court which issued it.
 82. (1) When a warrant of arrest is executed outside the district in which it was issued,
 the person arrested shall, unless the Court which issued the warrant is within thirty kilometers
 of the place of arrest or is nearer than the Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent of
 Police or Commissioner of Police within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the arrest was
 made, or unless security is taken under section 73, be taken before such Magistrate or
 District Superintendent or Commissioner.
 (2) On the arrest of any person referred to in sub-section (1), the police officer shall
 forthwith give the information regarding such arrest and the place where the arrested person
 is being held to the designated police officer in the district and to such officer of another
 district where the arrested person normally resides.
 83. (1) The Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent of Police or Commissioner
 of Police shall, if the person arrested appears to be the person intended by the Court which
 issued the warrant, direct his removal in custody to such Court:
 Provided that, if the offence is bailable, and such person is ready and willing to give
 bail to the satisfaction of such Magistrate, District Superintendent or Commissioner, or a
 direction has been endorsed under section 73 on the warrant and such person is ready and
 willing to give the security required by such direction, the Magistrate, District Superintendent
 or Commissioner shall take such bail or security, as the case may be, and forward the bond,
 to the Court which issued the warrant:
 Provided further that if the offence is a non-bailable one, it shall be lawful for the Chief
 Judicial Magistrate (subject to the provisions of section 493), or the Sessions Judge, of the
 district in which the arrest is made on consideration of the information and the documents
 referred to in sub-section (2) of section 80, to release such person on bail.
 (2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a police officer from taking
 security under section 73.