 84. (1) If any Court has reason to believe (whether after taking evidence or not) that
 any person against whom a warrant has been issued by it has absconded or is concealing
 himself so that such warrant cannot be executed, such Court may publish a written
 proclamation requiring him to appear at a specified place and at a specified time not less
 than thirty days from the date of publishing such proclamation.
 (2) The proclamation shall be published as follows:—
 (i) (a) it shall be publicly read in some conspicuous place of the town or village
 in which such person ordinarily resides;
 (b) it shall be affixed to some conspicuous part of the house or homestead in
 which such person ordinarily resides or to some conspicuous place of such town or
 village;
 (c) a copy thereof shall be affixed to some conspicuous part of the
 Court-house;
 (ii) the Court may also, if it thinks fit, direct a copy of the proclamation to be
 published in a daily newspaper circulating in the place in which such person ordinarily
 resides.
 (3) A statement in writing by the Court issuing the proclamation to the effect that the
 proclamation was duly published on a specified day, in the manner specified in clause (i) of
 sub-section (2), shall be conclusive evidence that the requirements of this section have
 been complied with, and that the proclamation was published on such day.
 (4) Where a proclamation published under sub-section (1) is in respect of a person
 accused of an offence which is made punishable with imprisonment of ten years or more, or
 imprisonment for life or with death under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or under any
 other law for the time being in force, and such person fails to appear at the specified place
 and time required by the proclamation, the Court may, after making such inquiry as it thinks
 fit, pronounce him a proclaimed offender and make a declaration to that effect.
 (5) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) shall apply to a declaration made
 by the Court under sub-section (4) as they apply to the proclamation published under
 sub-section (1).
 85. (1) The Court issuing a proclamation under section 84 may, for reasons to be
 recorded in writing, at any time after the issue of the proclamation, order the attachment of
 any property, movable or immovable, or both, belonging to the proclaimed person:
 Provided that where at the time of the issue of the proclamation the Court is satisfied,
 by affidavit or otherwise, that the person in relation to whom the proclamation is to be
 issued,—
 (a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property; or
 (b) is about to remove the whole or any part of his property from the local
 jurisdiction of the Court,
 it may order the attachment of property simultaneously with the issue of the proclamation.
 (2) Such order shall authorise the attachment of any property belonging to such
 person within the district in which it is made; and it shall authorise the attachment of any
 property belonging to such person without such district when endorsed by the District
 Magistrate within whose district such property is situate.
 (3) If the property ordered to be attached is a debt or other movable property, the
 attachment under this section shall be made—
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (a) by seizure; or
25
 (b) by the appointment of a receiver; or
 (c) by an order in writing prohibiting the delivery of such property to the
 proclaimed person or to any one on his behalf; or
 (d) by all or any two of such methods, as the Court thinks fit.
 5
 10
 15
 5 of 1908.
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (4) If the property ordered to be attached is immovable, the attachment under this
 section shall, in the case of land paying revenue to the State Government, be made through
 the Collector of the district in which the land is situate, and in all other cases—
 (a) by taking possession; or
 (b) by the appointment of a receiver; or
 (c) by an order in writing prohibiting the payment of rent on delivery of property
 to the proclaimed person or to any one on his behalf; or
 (d) by all or any two of such methods, as the Court thinks fit.
 (5) If the property ordered to be attached consists of live-stock or is of a perishable
 nature, the Court may, if it thinks it expedient, order immediate sale thereof, and in such case
 the proceeds of the sale shall abide the order of the Court.
 (6) The powers, duties and liabilities of a receiver appointed under this section shall
 be the same as those of a receiver appointed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
 86. The Court may, on the written request from a police officer not below the rank of
 the Superintendent of Police or Commissioner of Police, initiate the process of requesting
 assistance from a Court or an authority in the contracting State for identification, attachment
 and forfeiture of property belonging to a proclaimed person in accordance with the procedure
 provided in Chapter VIII.
 87. (1) If any claim is preferred to, or objection made to the attachment of, any
 property attached under section 85, within six months from the date of such attachment, by
 any person other than the proclaimed person, on the ground that the claimant or objector
 has an interest in such property, and that such interest is not liable to attachment under
 section 85, the claim or objection shall be inquired into, and may be allowed or disallowed in
 whole or in part:
 Provided that any claim preferred or objection made within the period allowed by this
 sub-section may, in the event of the death of the claimant or objector, be continued by his
 legal representative.
 (2) Claims or objections under sub-section (1) may be preferred or made in the Court
 by which the order of attachment is issued, or, if the claim or objection is in respect of
 property attached under an order endorsed under sub-section (2) of section 85, in the Court
 of the Chief Judicial Magistrate of the district in which the attachment is made.
 (3) Every such claim or objection shall be inquired into by the Court in which it is
 preferred or made:
 Provided that, if it is preferred or made in the Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate, he
 may make it over for disposal to any Magistrate subordinate to him.
 (4) Any person whose claim or objection has been disallowed in whole or in part by an
 order under sub-section (1) may, within a period of one year from the date of such order,
 institute a suit to establish the right which he claims in respect of the property in dispute;
 but subject to the result of such suit, if any, the order shall be conclusive.
 88. (1) If the proclaimed person appears within the time specified in the proclamation,
 the Court shall make an order releasing the property from the attachment.
 (2) If the proclaimed person does not appear within the time specified in the
 proclamation, the property under the attachment shall be at the disposal of the State
 Identification
 and
 attachment of
 property of
 proclaimed
 person.
 Claims and
 objections to
 attachment.
 Release, sale
 and
 restoration of
 attached
 property.
26
 Government; but it shall not be sold until the expiration of six months from the date of the
 attachment and until any claim preferred or objection made under section 87 has been
 disposed of under that section, unless it is subject to speedy and natural decay, or the
 Court considers that the sale would be for the benefit of the owner; in either of which cases
 the Court may cause it to be sold whenever it thinks fit.
 (3) If, within two years from the date of the attachment, any person whose property is
 or has been at the disposal of the State Government, under sub-section (2), appears voluntarily
 or is apprehended and brought before the Court by whose order the property was attached,
 or the Court to which such Court is subordinate, and proves to the satisfaction of such
 Court that he did not abscond or conceal himself for the purpose of avoiding execution of
 the warrant, and that he had not such notice of the proclamation as to enable him to attend
 within the time specified therein, such property, or, if the same has been sold, the net
 proceeds of the sale, or, if part only thereof has been sold, the net proceeds of the sale and
 the residue of the property, shall, after satisfying therefrom all costs incurred in consequence
 of the attachment, be delivered to him.
 Appeal from
 order rejecting
 application
 for restoration
 of attached
 property.
 Issue of
 warrant in lieu
 of, or in
 addition to,
 summons.
 Power to take
 bond for
 appearance.
 Arrest on
 breach of bond
 for
 appearance.
 Provisions of
 this Chapter
 generally
 applicable to
 summoneses
 and warrants
 of arrest.
 Summons to
 produce
 document or
 other thing.
 89. Any person referred to in sub-section (3) of section 88, who is aggrieved by any
 refusal to deliver property or the proceeds of the sale thereof may appeal to the Court to
 which appeals ordinarily lie from the sentences of the first-mentioned Court.
 D.—Other rules regarding processes
 90. A Court may, in any case in which it is empowered by this Sanhita to issue a
 summons for the appearance of any person, issue, after recording its reasons in writing, a
 warrant for his arrest—
 (a) if, either before the issue of such summons, or after the issue of the same but
 before the time fixed for his appearance, the Court sees reason to believe that he has
 absconded or will not obey the summons; or
 (b) if at such time he fails to appear and the summons is proved to have been
 duly served in time to admit of his appearing in accordance therewith and no reasonable
 excuse is offered for such failure.
 91. When any person for whose appearance or arrest the officer presiding in any
 Court is empowered to issue a summons or warrant, is present in such Court, such officer
 may require such person to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his appearance in
 such Court, or any other Court to which the case may be transferred for trial.
 92. When any person who is bound by any bond taken under this Sanhita to appear
 before a Court, does not appear, the officer presiding in such Court may issue a warrant
 directing that such person be arrested and produced before him.
 93. The provisions contained in this Chapter relating to summons and warrant, and
 their issue, service and execution, shall, so far as may be, apply to every summons and
 every warrant of arrest issued under this Sanhita.
 CHAPTER VII
 PROCESSES TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OF THINGS
 A.—Summons to produce
 94. (1) Whenever any Court or any officer in charge of a police station considers that
 the production of any document, electronic communication, including communication
 devices which is likely to contain digital evidence or other thing is necessary or desirable
 for the purposes of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Sanhita
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
27
 by or before such Court or officer, such Court or officer may, by a written order, either in
 physical form or in electronic form, require the person in whose possession or power such
 document or thing is believed to be, to attend and produce it, or to produce it, at the time
 and place stated in the summons or order.
 5
 13 of 1891.
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (2) Any person required under this section merely to produce a document, or other
 thing shall be deemed to have complied with the requisition if he causes such document or
 thing to be produced instead of attending personally to produce the same.
 (3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed—
 (a) to affect sections 129 and 130 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 or
 the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891; or
 (b) to apply to a letter, postcard, or other document or any parcel or thing in the
 custody of the postal authority.
 95. (1) If any document, parcel or thing in the custody of a postal authority is, in the
 opinion of the District Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court of Session or High Court
 wanted for the purpose of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this
 Sanhita, such Magistrate or Court may require the postal authority to deliver the document,
 parcel or thing to such person as the Magistrate or Court directs.
 (2) If any such document, parcel or thing is, in the opinion of any other Magistrate,
 whether Executive or Judicial, or of any Commissioner of Police or District Superintendent
 of Police, wanted for any such purpose, he may require the postal authority to cause search
 to be made for and to detain such document, parcel or thing pending the order of a District
 Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate or Court under sub-section (1).
 B.—Search-warrants
 96. (1) (a) Where any Court has reason to believe that a person to whom a summons
 order under section 94 or a requisition under sub-section (1) of section 95 has been, or
 might be, addressed, will not or would not produce the document or thing as required by
 such summons or requisition; or
 (b) where such document or thing is not known to the Court to be in the possession
 of any person; or
 (c) where the Court considers that the purposes of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding
 under this Sanhita will be served by a general search or inspection, it may issue a
 search-warrant; and the person to whom such warrant is directed, may search or inspect in
 accordance therewith and the provisions hereinafter contained.
 (2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, specify in the warrant the particular place or part
 thereof to which only the search or inspection shall extend; and the person charged with
 the execution of such warrant shall then search or inspect only the place or part so specified.
 (3) Nothing contained in this section shall authorise any Magistrate other than a
 District Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate to grant a warrant to search for a document,
 parcel or other thing in the custody of the postal or telegraph authority.
 97. (1) If a District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first
 class, upon information and after such inquiry as he thinks necessary, has reason to believe
 that any place is used for the deposit or sale of stolen property, or for the deposit, sale or
 production of any objectionable article to which this section applies, or that any such
 objectionable article is deposited in any place, he may by warrant authorise any police
 officer above the rank of a constable—
 (a) to enter, with such assistance as may be required, such place;
 (b) to search the same in the manner specified in the warrant;
 Procedure as
 to letters and
 telegrams.
 When search
warrant may
 be issued.
 Search of
 place
 suspected to
 contain stolen
 property,
 forged
 documents,
 etc.
28
 (c) to take possession of any property or article therein found which he
 reasonably suspects to be stolen property or objectionable article to which this
 section applies;
 (d) to convey such property or article before a Magistrate, or to guard the same
 on the spot until the offender is taken before a Magistrate, or otherwise to dispose of
 it in some place of safety;
 (e) to take into custody and carry before a Magistrate every person found in
 such place who appears to have been privy to the deposit, sale or production of any
 such property or article knowing or having reasonable cause to suspect it to be
 stolen property or, as the case may be, objectionable article to which this section
 applies.
 (2) The objectionable articles to which this section applies are—
 (a) counterfeit coin;
 (b) pieces of metal made in contravention of the Coinage Act, 2011, or brought
 into India in contravention of any notification for the time being in force issued under
 section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962;
 (c) counterfeit currency note; counterfeit stamps;
 (d) forged documents;
 (e) false seals;
 (f) obscene objects referred to in section 292 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
 Sanhita, 2023;
 (g) instruments or materials used for the production of any of the articles
 mentioned in clauses (a) to (f).
 Power to
 declare certain
 publications
 forfeited and
 to issue
 search
warrants for
 same.
 Application to
 High Court to
 set aside
 declaration of
 forfeiture.
 98. (1) Where—
 (a) any newspaper, or book; or
 (b) any document,
 wherever printed, appears to the State Government to contain any matter the publication
 of which is punishable under section 150 or section 194 or section 195 or section 292 or
 section 293 or section 297 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the State Government may,
 by notification, stating the grounds of its opinion, declare every copy of the issue of the
 newspaper containing such matter, and every copy of such book or other document to be
 forfeited to Government, and thereupon any police officer may seize the same wherever
 found in India and any Magistrate may by warrant authorise any police officer not below
 the rank of sub-inspector to enter upon and search for the same in any premises where any
 copy of such issue, or any such book or other document may be or may be reasonably
 suspected to be.
 (2) In this section and in section 99,—
 (a) "newspaper" and "book" have the same meaning as in the Press and
 Registration of Books Act, 1867;
 (b) "document" includes any painting, drawing or photograph, or other visible
 representation.
 (3) No order passed or action taken under this section shall be called in question in
 any Court otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of section 99.
 99. (1) Any person having any interest in any newspaper, book or other document, in
 respect of which a declaration of forfeiture has been made under section 98, may, within two
 months from the date of publication in the Official Gazette of such declaration, apply to the
 High Court to set aside such declaration on the ground that the issue of the newspaper, or
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 11 of 2011.
 52 of 1962.
 25 of 1867.
 40
 45
29
 the book or other document, in respect of which the declaration was made, did not contain
 any such matter as is referred to in sub-section (1) of section 98.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (2) Every such application shall, where the High Court consists of three or more
 Judges, be heard and determined by a Special Bench of the High Court composed of three
 Judges and where the High Court consists of less than three Judges, such Special Bench
 shall be composed of all the Judges of that High Court.
 (3) On the hearing of any such application with reference to any newspaper, any copy
 of such newspaper may be given in evidence in aid of the proof of the nature or tendency
 of the words, signs or visible representations contained in such newspaper, in respect of
 which the declaration of forfeiture was made.
 (4) The High Court shall, if it is not satisfied that the issue of the newspaper, or the
 book or other document, in respect of which the application has been made, contained any
 such matter as is referred to in sub-section (1) of section 98, set aside the declaration of
 forfeiture.
 (5) Where there is a difference of opinion among the Judges forming the Special
 Bench, the decision shall be in accordance with the opinion of the majority of those Judges.
 100. If any District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first
 class has reason to believe that any person is confined under such circumstances that the
 confinement amounts to an offence, he may issue a search-warrant, and the person to
 whom such warrant is directed may search for the person so confined; and such search
 shall be made in accordance therewith, and the person, if found, shall be immediately taken
 before a Magistrate, who shall make such order as in the circumstances of the case seems
 proper.
 101. Upon complaint made on oath of the abduction or unlawful detention of a
 woman, or a female child under the age of eighteen years for any unlawful purpose, a
 District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class may make an
 order for the immediate restoration of such woman to her liberty, or of such female child to
 her husband, parent, guardian or other person having the lawful charge of such child, and
 may compel compliance with such order, using such force as may be necessary.
 102. The provisions of sections 32, 72, 74, 76, 79, 80 and 81 shall, so far as may be,
 apply to all search-warrants issued under section 96, section 97, section 98 or section 100.
 103. (1) Whenever any place liable to search or inspection under this Chapter is
 closed, any person residing in, or being in charge of, such place, shall, on demand of the
 officer or other person executing the warrant, and on production of the warrant, allow him
 free ingress thereto, and afford all reasonable facilities for a search therein.
 (2) If ingress into such place cannot be so obtained, the officer or other person
 executing the warrant may proceed in the manner provided by sub-section (2) of section 44.
 (3) Where any person in or about such place is reasonably suspected of concealing
 about his person any article for which search should be made, such person may be searched
 and if such person is a woman, the search shall be made by another woman with strict
 regard to decency.
 (4) Before making a search under this Chapter, the officer or other person about to
 make it shall call upon two or more independent and respectable inhabitants of the locality
 in which the place to be searched is situate or of any other locality if no such inhabitant of
 the said locality is available or is willing to be a witness to the search, to attend and witness
 the search and may issue an order in writing to them or any of them so to do.
 (5) The search shall be made in their presence, and a list of all things seized in the
 course of such search and of the places in which they are respectively found shall be
 Search for
 persons
 wrongfully
 confined.
 Power to
 compel
 restoration of
 abducted
 females.
 Direction,
 etc., of
 search
warrants.
 Persons in
 charge of
 closed place to
 allow search.
30
 prepared by such officer or other person and signed by such witnesses; but no person
 witnessing a search under this section shall be required to attend the Court as a witness of
 the search unless specially summoned by it.
 (6) The occupant of the place searched, or some person in his behalf, shall, in every
 instance, be permitted to attend during the search, and a copy of the list prepared under this
 section, signed by the said witnesses, shall be delivered to such occupant or person.
 (7) When any person is searched under sub-section (3), a list of all things taken
 possession of shall be prepared, and a copy thereof shall be delivered to such person.
 (8) Any person who, without reasonable cause, refuses or neglects to attend and
 witness a search under this section, when called upon to do so by an order in writing
 delivered or tendered to him, shall be deemed to have committed an offence under
 section 220 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 Disposal of
 things found
 in search
 beyond
 jurisdiction.
 Recording of
 search and
 seizure
 through audio
video
 electronic
 means.
 Power of
 police officer
 to seize
 certain
 property.
 Attachment,
 forfeiture or
 restoration of
 property.
 104. When, in the execution of a search-warrant at any place beyond the local
 jurisdiction of the Court which issued the same, any of the things for which search is made,
 are found, such things, together with the list of the same prepared under the provisions
 hereinafter contained, shall be immediately taken before the Court issuing the warrant,
 unless such place is nearer to the Magistrate having jurisdiction therein than to such Court,
 in which case the list and things shall be immediately taken before such Magistrate; and,
 unless there be good cause to the contrary, such Magistrate shall make an order authorising
 them to be taken to such Court.
 C.—Miscellaneous
 105. The process of conducting search of a place or taking possession of any property,
 article or thing under this Chapter or under section 185, including preparation of the list of
 all things seized in the course of such search and seizure and signing of such list by
 witnesses, shall be recorded through any audio-video electronic means preferably cell
 phone and the police officer shall without delay forward such recording to the District
 Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class.
 106. (1) Any police officer may seize any property which may be alleged or suspected
 to have been stolen, or which may be found under circumstances which create suspicion of
 the commission of any offence.
 (2) Such police officer, if subordinate to the officer in charge of a police station, shall
 forthwith report the seizure to that officer.
 (3) Every police officer acting under sub-section (1) shall forthwith report the seizure
 to the Magistrate having jurisdiction and where the property seized is such that it cannot be
 conveniently transported to the Court, or where there is difficulty in securing proper
 accommodation for the custody of such property, or where the continued retention of the
 property in police custody may not be considered necessary for the purpose of investigation,
 he may give custody thereof to any person on his executing a bond undertaking to produce
 the property before the Court as and when required and to give effect to the further orders
 of the Court as to the disposal of the same:
 Provided that where the property seized under sub-section (1) is subject to speedy
 and natural decay and if the person entitled to the possession of such property is unknown
 or absent and the value of such property is less than five hundred rupees, it may forthwith
 be sold by auction under the orders of the Superintendent of Police and the provisions of
 sections 505 and 506 shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply to the net proceeds of
 such sale.
 107. (1) Where a police officer making an investigation has reason to believe that any
 property is derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, as a result of a criminal activity or from
 the commission of any offence, he may, with the approval of the Superintendent of Police or
 Commissioner of Police, make an application to the Court or the Judicial Magistrate exercising
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
31
 jurisdiction to take cognizance of the offence or commit for trial or try the case, for the
 attachment of such property.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (2) If the Court or the Judicial Magistrate has reasons to believe, whether before or
 after taking evidence, that all or any of such properties are proceeds of crime, the Court or
 the Magistrate may issue a notice upon such person calling upon him to show cause within
 a period of fourteen days as to why an order of attachment shall not be made.
 (3) Where the notice issued to any person under sub-section (2) specifies any property
 as being held by any other person on behalf of such person, a copy of the notice shall also
 be served upon such other person.
 (4) The Court or the Judicial Magistrate may, after considering the explanation, if any,
 to the show-cause notice issued under sub-section (2) and the material fact available before
 such Court or Magistrate and after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to such
 person or persons, may pass an order of attachment, in respect of those properties which
 are found to be the proceeds of crime:
 Provided that if such person does not appear before the Court or the Magistrate or
 represent his case before the Court or Judicial Magistrate within a period of fourteen days
 specified in the show-cause notice, the Court or the Judicial Magistrate may proceed to
 pass the ex-parte order.
 (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if the Court or the Judicial
 Magistrate is of the opinion that issuance of notice under the said sub-section would
 defeat the object of attachment or seizure, the Court or Judicial Magistrate may by an
 interim order passed ex-parte direct attachment or seizure of such property, and such order
 shall remain in force till an order under sub-section (6) is passed.
 (6) If the Court or the Judicial Magistrate finds the attached or seized properties to be
 the proceeds of crime, the Court or the Judicial Magistrate shall by order direct the District
 Magistrate to rateably distribute such proceeds of crime to the persons who are affected by
 such crime.
 (7) On receipt of an order passed under sub-section (6), the District Magistrate shall,
 within a period of sixty days distribute the proceeds of crime either by himself or authorise
 any officer subordinate to him to effect such distribution.
 (8) If there are no claimants to receive such proceeds or no claimant is ascertainable
 or there is any surplus after satisfying the claimants, such proceeds of crime shall stand
 forfeited to the Government.
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the word ‘‘property’’ and the
 expression ‘‘proceeds of crime’’ shall have the meaning assigned to them in clause (d) of
 section 111.
 108. Any Magistrate may direct a search to be made in his presence of any place for
 the search of which he is competent to issue a search-warrant.
 109. Any Court may, if it thinks fit, impound any document or thing produced before
 it under this Sanhita.
 110. (1) Where a Court in the territories to which this Sanhita extends (hereafter in this
 section referred to as the said territories) desires that—
 (a) a summons to an accused person; or
 (b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person; or
 (c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document
 or other thing, or to produce it; or
 Magistrate
 may direct
 search in his
 presence.
 Power to
 impound
 document,
 etc., produced.
 Reciprocal
 arrangements
 regarding
 processes.
32
 (d) a search-warrant,
 issued by it shall be served or executed at any place,—
 (i) within the local jurisdiction of a Court in any State or area in India outside the
 said territories, it may send such summons or warrant in duplicate by post or otherwise,
 to the presiding officer of that Court to be served or executed; and where any summons
 referred to in clause (a) or clause (c) has been so served, the provisions of section 70
 shall apply in relation to such summons as if the presiding officer of the Court to
 whom it is sent were a Magistrate in the said territories;
 (ii) in any country or place outside India in respect of which arrangements have
 been made by the Central Government with the Government of such country or place
 for service or execution of summons or warrant in relation to criminal matters (hereafter
 in this section referred to as the contracting State), it may send such summons or
 warrant in duplicate in such form, directed to such Court, Judge or Magistrate, and
 send to such authority for transmission, as the Central Government may, by
 notification, specify in this behalf.
 (2) Where a Court in the said territories has received for service or execution—
 (a) a summons to an accused person; or
 (b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person; or
 (c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document
 or other thing, or to produce it; or
 (d) a search-warrant,
 issued by—
 (I) a Court in any State or area in India outside the said territories;
 (II) a Court, Judge or Magistrate in a contracting State,
 it shall cause the same to be served or executed as if it were a summons or warrant received
 by it from another Court in the said territories for service or execution within its local
 jurisdiction; and where—
 (i) a warrant of arrest has been executed, the person arrested shall, so far as
 possible, be dealt with in accordance with the procedure specified by sections 82 and 83;
 (ii) a search-warrant has been executed, the things found in the search shall, so
 far as possible, be dealt with in accordance with the procedure specified by
 section 104:
 Provided that in a case where a summons or search-warrant received from a contracting
 State has been executed, the documents or things produced or things found in the search
 shall be forwarded to the Court issuing the summons or search-warrant through such
 authority as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
 CHAPTER VIII
 RECIPROCAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR ASSISTANCE IN CERTAIN MATTERS AND PROCEDURE FOR
 ATTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY
 Definitions.
 111. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
 (a) "contracting State" means any country or place outside India in respect of
 which arrangements have been made by the Central Government with the Government
 of such country through a treaty or otherwise;
 (b) "identifying" includes establishment of a proof that the property was derived
 from, or used in, the commission of an offence;
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
33
 (c) "proceeds of crime" means any property derived or obtained directly or
 indirectly, by any person as a result of criminal activity (including crime involving
 currency transfers) or the value of any such property;
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (d) "property" means property and assets of every description whether corporeal
 or incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or intangible and deeds and instruments
 evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or assets derived or used in the
 commission of an offence and includes property obtained through proceeds of crime;
 (e) "tracing" means determining the nature, source, disposition, movement,
 title or ownership of property.
 112. (1) If, in the course of an investigation into an offence, an application is made by
 the investigating officer or any officer superior in rank to the investigating officer that
 evidence may be available in a country or place outside India, any Criminal Court may issue
 a letter of request to a Court or an authority in that country or place competent to deal with
 such request to examine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and
 circumstances of the case and to record his statement made in the course of such examination
 and also to require such person or any other person to produce any document or thing
 which may be in his possession pertaining to the case and to forward all the evidence so
 taken or collected or the authenticated copies thereof or the thing so collected to the Court
 issuing such letter.
 (2) The letter of request shall be transmitted in such manner as the Central Government
 may specify in this behalf.
 (3) Every statement recorded or document or thing received under sub-section (1)
 shall be deemed to be the evidence collected during the course of investigation under this
 Chapter.
 113. (1) Upon receipt of a letter of request from a Court or an authority in a country or
 place outside India competent to issue such letter in that country or place for the examination
 of any person or production of any document or thing in relation to an offence under
 investigation in that country or place, the Central Government may, if it thinks fit—
 (i) forward the same to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate as he
 may appoint in this behalf, who shall thereupon summon the person before him and
 record his statement or cause the document or thing to be produced; or
 (ii) send the letter to any police officer for investigation, who shall thereupon
 investigate into the offence in the same manner,
 as if the offence had been committed within India.
 (2) All the evidence taken or collected under sub-section (1), or authenticated copies
 thereof or the thing so collected, shall be forwarded by the Magistrate or police officer, as
 the case may be, to the Central Government for transmission to the Court or the authority
 issuing the letter of request, in such manner as the Central Government may deem fit.
 114. (1) Where a Court in India, in relation to a criminal matter, desires that a warrant
 for arrest of any person to attend or produce a document or other thing issued by it shall be
 executed in any place in a contracting State, it shall send such warrant in duplicate in such
 form to such Court, Judge or Magistrate through such authority, as the Central Government
 may, by notification, specify in this behalf and that Court, Judge or Magistrate, as the case
 may be, shall cause the same to be executed.
 (2) If , in the course of an investigation or any inquiry into an offence, an application
 is made by the investigating officer or any officer superior in rank to the investigating
 officer that the attendance of a person who is in any place in a contracting State is required
 in connection with such investigation or inquiry and the Court is satisfied that such
 attendance is so required, it shall issue a summons or warrant, in duplicate, against the said
 Letter of
 request to
 competent
 authority for
 investigation
 in a country
 or place
 outside India.
 Letter of
 request from a
 country or
 place outside
 India to a
 Court or an
 authority for
 investigation
 in India.
 Assistance in
 securing
 transfer of
 persons.
34
 person to such Court, Judge or Magistrate, in such form as the Central Government may, by
 notification, specify in this behalf, to cause the same to be served or executed.
 (3) Where a Court in India, in relation to a criminal matter, has received a warrant for
 arrest of any person requiring him to attend or attend and produce a document or other
 thing in that Court or before any other investigating agency, issued by a Court, Judge or
 Magistrate in a contracting State, the same shall be executed as if it is the warrant received
 by it from another Court in India for execution within its local limits.
 (4) Where a person transferred to a contracting State pursuant to sub-section (3) is a
 prisoner in India, the Court in India or the Central Government may impose such conditions
 as that Court or Government deems fit.
 (5) Where the person transferred to India pursuant to sub-section (1) or
 sub-section (2) is a prisoner in a contracting State, the Court in India shall ensure that the
 conditions subject to which the prisoner is transferred to India are complied with and such
 prisoner shall be kept in such custody subject to such conditions as the Central Government
 may direct in writing.
 Assistance in
 relation to
 orders of
 attachment or
 forfeiture of
 property.
 Identifying
 unlawfully
 acquired
 property.
 Seizure or
 attachment of
 property.
 115. (1) Where a Court in India has reasonable grounds to believe that any property
 obtained by any person is derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by such person from
 the commission of an offence, it may make an order of attachment or forfeiture of such
 property, as it may deem fit under the provisions of sections 116 to 122 (both inclusive).
 (2) Where the Court has made an order for attachment or forfeiture of any property
 under sub-section (1), and such property is suspected to be in a contracting State, the
 Court may issue a letter of request to a Court or an authority in the contracting State for
 execution of such order.
 (3) Where a letter of request is received by the Central Government from a Court or an
 authority in a contracting State requesting attachment or forfeiture of the property in India,
 derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by any person from the commission of an offence
 committed in that contracting State, the Central Government may forward such letter of
 request to the Court, as it thinks fit, for execution in accordance with the provisions of
 sections 116 to 122 (both inclusive) or, as the case may be, any other law for the time being
 in force.
 116. (1) The Court shall, under sub-section (1), or on receipt of a letter of request
 under sub-section (3) of section 115, direct any police officer not below the rank of
 Sub-Inspector of Police to take all steps necessary for tracing and identifying such property.
 (2) The steps referred to in sub-section (1) may include any inquiry, investigation or
 survey in respect of any person, place, property, assets, documents, books of account in
 any bank or public financial institutions or any other relevant matters.
 (3) Any inquiry, investigation or survey referred to in sub-section (2) shall be carried
 out by an officer mentioned in sub-section (1) in accordance with such directions issued by
 the said Court in this behalf.
 117. (1) Where any officer conducting an inquiry or investigation under section 116
 has a reason to believe that any property in relation to which such inquiry or investigation
 is being conducted is likely to be concealed transferred or dealt with in any manner which
 will result in disposal of such property, he may make an order for seizing such property and
 where it is not practicable to seize such property, he may make an order of attachment
 directing that such property shall not be transferred or otherwise dealt with, except with the
 prior permission of the officer making such order, and a copy of such order shall be served
 on the person concerned.
 (2) Any order made under sub-section (1) shall have no effect unless the said order is
 confirmed by an order of the said Court, within a period of thirty days of its being made.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
35
 118. (1) The Court may appoint the District Magistrate of the area where the property
 is situated, or any other officer that may be nominated by the District Magistrate, to perform
 the functions of an Administrator of such property.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 18 of 2013.
 45
 (2) The Administrator appointed under sub-section (1) shall receive and manage the
 property in relation to which the order has been made under sub-section (1) of section 117
 or under section 120 in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified by
 the Central Government.
 (3) The Administrator shall also take such measures, as the Central Government may
 direct, to dispose of the property which is forfeited to the Central Government.
 119. (1) If as a result of the inquiry, investigation or survey under section 116, the
 Court has reason to believe that all or any of such properties are proceeds of crime, it may
 serve a notice upon such person (hereinafter referred to as the person affected) calling
 upon him within a period of thirty days specified in the notice to indicate the source of
 income, earnings or assets, out of which or by means of which he has acquired such
 property, the evidence on which he relies and other relevant information and particulars,
 and to show cause why all or any of such properties, as the case may be, should not be
 declared to be proceeds of crime and forfeited to the Central Government.
 (2) Where a notice under sub-section (1) to any person specifies any property as
 being held on behalf of such person by any other person, a copy of the notice shall also be
 served upon such other person.
 120. (1) The Court may, after considering the explanation, if any, to the show-cause
 notice issued under section 119 and the material available before it and after giving to the
 person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds any property specified in the
 notice through any other person, to such other person also) a reasonable opportunity of
 being heard, by order, record a finding whether all or any of the properties in question are
 proceeds of crime:
 Provided that if the person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds
 any property specified in the notice through any other person such other person also) does
 not appear before the Court or represent his case before it within a period of thirty days
 specified in the show-cause notice, the Court may proceed to record a finding under this
 sub-section ex parte on the basis of evidence available before it.
 (2) Where the Court is satisfied that some of the properties referred to in the
 show-cause notice are proceeds of crime but it is not possible to identify specifically such
 properties, then, it shall be lawful for the Court to specify the properties which, to the
 best of its judegment, are proceeds of crime and record a finding accordingly under
 sub-section (1).
 (3) Where the Court records a finding under this section to the effect that any property
 is proceeds of crime, such property shall stand forfeited to the Central Government free
 from all encumbrances.
 (4) Where any shares in a company stand forfeited to the Central Government under
 this section, then, the company shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies
 Act, 2013 or forthwith register the Central Government as the transferee of such shares.
 121. (1) Where the Court makes a declaration that any property stands forfeited to
 the Central Government under section 120 and it is a case where the source of only a part of
 such property has not been proved to the satisfaction of the Court, it shall make an order
 giving an option to the person affected to pay, in lieu of forfeiture, a fine equal to the market
 value of such part.
 (2) Before making an order imposing a fine under sub-section (1), the person affected
 shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
 Management
 of properties
 seized or
 forfeited under
 this Chapter.
 Notice of
 forfeiture of
 property.
 Forfeiture of
 property in
 certain cases.
 Fine in lieu of
 forfeiture.
36
 (3) Where the person affected pays the fine due under sub-section (1), within such
 time as may be allowed in that behalf, the Court may, by order, revoke the declaration of
 forfeiture under section 120 and thereupon such property shall stand released.
 Certain
 transfers to be
 null and void.
 Procedure in
 respect of
 letter of
 request.
 Application of
 this Chapter.
 Security for
 keeping  peace
 on conviction.
 Security for
 keeping peace
 in other cases.
 122. Where after the making of an order under sub-section (1) of section 117 or the
 issue of a notice under section 119, any property referred to in the said order or notice is
 transferred by any mode whatsoever such transfers shall, for the purposes of the
 proceedings under this Chapter, be ignored and if such property is subsequently forfeited
 to the Central Government under section 120, then, the transfer of such property shall be
 deemed to be null and void.
 123. Every letter of request, summons or warrant, received by the Central Government
 from, and every letter of request, summons or warrant, to be transmitted to a contracting
 State under this Chapter shall be transmitted to a contracting State or, as the case may be,
 sent to the concerned Court in India in such form and in such manner as the Central
 Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
 124. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that
 the application of this Chapter in relation to a contracting State with which reciprocal
 arrangements have been made, shall be subject to such conditions, exceptions or
 qualifications as are specified in the said notification.
 CHAPTER  IX
 SECURITY FOR KEEPING THE PEACE AND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR
 125. (1) When a Court of Session or Court of a Magistrate of the first class convicts
 a person of any of the offences specified in sub-section (2) or of abetting any such offence
 and is of opinion that it is necessary to take security from such person for keeping the
 peace, the Court may, at the time of passing sentence on such person, order him to execute
 a bond, with or without sureties, for keeping the peace for such period, not exceeding three
 years, as it thinks fit.
 (2) The offences referred to in sub-section (1) are—
 (a) any offence punishable under Chapter VIII of the Bharatiya Nyaya
 Sanhita, 2023, other than an offence punishable under section 191 or section 194 or
 section 195 thereof;
 (b) any offence which consists of, or includes, assault or using criminal force or
 committing mischief;
 (c) any offence of criminal intimidation;
 (d) any other offence which caused, or was intended or known to be likely to
 cause, a breach of the peace.
 (3) If the conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, the bond so executed shall
 become void.
 (4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by a Court
 when exercising its powers of revision.
 126. (1) When an Executive Magistrate receives information that any person is likely
 to commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquility or to do any wrongful act
 that may probably occasion a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquility and is of
 opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding, he may, in the manner hereinafter
 provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a
 bond with or without sureties, for keeping the peace for such period, not exceeding one
 year, as the Magistrate thinks fit.
 (2) Proceedings under this section may be taken before any Executive Magistrate
 when either the place where the breach of the peace or disturbance is apprehended is within
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
37
 his local jurisdiction or there is within such jurisdiction a person who is likely to commit a
 breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquility or to do any wrongful act as aforesaid
 beyond such jurisdiction.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 