127. (1) When an Executive Magistrate receives information that there is within his
 local jurisdiction any person who, within or without such jurisdiction,—
 (i) either orally or in writing or in any other manner, intentionally disseminates
 or attempts to disseminate or abets the dissemination of,—
 (a) any matter the publication of which is punishable under section 150 or
 section 194 or section 195 or section 297 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, or
 (b) any matter concerning a Judge acting or purporting to act in the
 discharge of his official duties which amounts to criminal intimidation or
 defamation under the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023,
 (ii) makes, produces, publishes or keeps for sale, imports, exports, conveys,
 sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits or in any other manner puts into
 circulation any obscene matter such as is referred to in section 292 of the Bhartiya
 Nyaya Sanhita, 2023,
 and the Magistrate is of opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding, the Magistrate
 may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should
 not be ordered to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his good behaviour for such
 period, not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit.
 (2) No proceedings shall be taken under this section against the editor, proprietor,
 printer or publisher of any publication registered under, and edited, printed and published
 in conformity with, the rules laid down in the Press and Registration of Periodicals Act, 2023
 with reference to any matter contained in such publication except by the order or under the
 authority of the State Government or some officer empowered by the State Government in
 this behalf.
 128. When an Executive Magistrate receives information that there is within his local
 jurisdiction a person taking precautions to conceal his presence and that there is reason to
 believe that he is doing so with a view to committing a cognizable offence, the Magistrate
 may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should
 not be ordered to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his good behaviour for such
 period, not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit.
 129. When an Executive Magistrate receives information that there is within his local
 jurisdiction a person who—
 (a) is by habit a robber, house-breaker, thief, or forger, or
 (b) is by habit a receiver of stolen property knowing the same to have been
 stolen, or
 (c) habitually protects or harbours thieves, or aids in the concealment or disposal
 of stolen property, or
 (d) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of, the
 offence of kidnapping, abduction, extortion, cheating or mischief, or any offence
 punishable under Chapter XII of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, or under
 section 176, section 177, section 178 or section 179 of that Sanhita, or
 (e) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of,
 offences, involving a breach of the peace, or
 (f) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of—
 Security for
 good
 behaviour
 from persons
 disseminating
 seditious
 matters.
 Security for
 good
 behaviour
 from
 suspected
 persons.
 Security for
 good
 behaviour
 from habitual
 offenders.
38
 (i) any offence under one or more of the following Acts, namely:—
 (a) the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940;
 (b) the Foreigners Act, 1946;
 (c) the Employees' Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions
 Act, 1952;
 (d) the Essential Commodities Act, 1955;
 (e) the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955;
 (f) the Customs Act, 1962;
 (g) the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006; or
 (ii) any offence punishable under any other law providing for the
 prevention of hoarding or profiteering or of adulteration of food or drugs or of
 corruption, or
 (g) is so desperate and dangerous to render his being at large without security
 hazardous to the community,
 such Magistrate may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show
 cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond, with sureties, for his good behaviour
 for such period, not exceeding three years, as the Magistrate thinks fit.
 Order to be
 made.
 Procedure in
 respect of
 person present
 in Court.
 Summons or
 warrant in
 case of person
 not so
 present.
 Copy of order
 to accompany
 summons or
 warrant.
 Power to
 dispense with
 personal
 attendance.
 Inquiry as to
 truth of
 information.
 130. When a Magistrate acting under section 126, section 127, section 128 or
 section 129, deems it necessary to require any person to show cause under such section, he
 shall make an order in writing, setting forth the substance of the information received, the
 amount of the bond to be executed, the term for which it is to be in force and the number of
 sureties, after considering the fitness for payment of sureties.
 131. If the person in respect of whom such order is made is present in Court, it shall
 be read over to him, or, if he so desires, the substance thereof shall be explained to him.
 132. If such person is not present in Court, the Magistrate shall issue a summons
 requiring him to appear, or, when such person is in custody, a warrant directing the officer
 in whose custody he is to bring him before the Court:
 Provided that whenever it appears to such Magistrate, upon the report of a police
 officer or upon other information (the substance of which report or information shall be
 recorded by the Magistrate), that there is reason to fear the commission of a breach of the
 peace, and that such breach of the peace cannot be prevented otherwise than by the
 immediate arrest of such person, the Magistrate may at any time issue a warrant for his
 arrest.
 133.  Every summons or warrant issued under section 132 shall be accompanied by a
 copy of the order made under section 130, and such copy shall be delivered by the officer
 serving or executing such summons or warrant to the person served with, or arrested under,
 the same.
 134. The Magistrate may, if he sees sufficient cause, dispense with the personal
 attendance of any person called upon to show cause why he should not be ordered to
 execute a bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour and may permit him to appear
 by a pleader.
 135. (1) When an order under section 130 has been read or explained under
 section 131 to a person present in Court, or when any person appears or is brought before
 a Magistrate in compliance with, or in execution of, a summons or warrant, issued under
 section 132, the Magistrate shall proceed to inquire into the truth of the information upon
 which action has been taken, and to take such further evidence as may appear necessary.
 23 of 1940.
 31 of 1946.
 19 of 1952.
 5
 10 of 1955.
 22 of 1955.
 52 of 1962.
 34 of 2006.
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
39
 (2) Such inquiry shall be made, as nearly as may be practicable, in the manner
 hereinafter prescribed for conducting trial and recording evidence in summons-cases.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (3) After the commencement, and before the completion, of the inquiry under
 sub-section (1), the Magistrate, if he considers that immediate measures are necessary for
 the prevention of a breach of the peace or disturbance of the public tranquility or the
 commission of any offence or for the public safety, may, for reasons to be recorded in
 writing, direct the person in respect of whom the order under section 130 has been made to
 execute a bond, with or without sureties, for keeping the peace or maintaining good behaviour
 until the conclusion of the inquiry, and may detain him in custody until such bond is
 executed or, in default of execution, until the inquiry is concluded:
 Provided that—
 (a) no person against whom proceedings are not being taken under section 127,
 section 128, or section 129 shall be directed to execute a bond for maintaining good
 behaviour;
 (b) the conditions of such bond, whether as to the amount thereof or as to the
 provision of sureties or the number thereof or the pecuniary extent of their liability,
 shall not be more onerous than those specified in the order under section 130.
 (4) For the purposes of this section the fact that a person is an habitual offender or is
 so desperate and dangerous as to render his being at large without security hazardous to
 the community may be proved by evidence of general repute or otherwise.
 (5) Where two or more persons have been associated together in the matter under
 inquiry, they may be dealt within the same or separate inquiries as the Magistrate shall think
 just.
 (6) The inquiry under this section shall be completed within a period of six months
 from the date of its commencement, and if such inquiry is not so completed, the proceedings
 under this Chapter shall, on the expiry of the said period, stand terminated unless, for
 special reasons to be recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise directs:
 Provided that where any person has been kept in detention pending such inquiry, the
 proceeding against that person, unless terminated earlier, shall stand terminated on the
 expiry of a period of six months of such detention.
 (7) Where any direction is made under sub-section (6) permitting the continuance of
 proceedings the Sessions Judge may, on an application made to him by the aggrieved party,
 vacate such direction if he is satisfied that it was not based on any special reason or was
 perverse.
 136. If, upon such inquiry, it is proved that it is necessary for keeping the peace or
 maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in respect of whom the
 inquiry is made should execute a bond, with or without sureties, the Magistrate shall make
 an order accordingly:
 Provided that—
 (a) no person shall be ordered to give security of a nature different from, or of
 an amount larger than, or for a period longer than, that specified in the order made
 under section 130;
 (b) the amount of every bond shall be fixed with due regard to the circumstances
 of the case and shall not be excessive;
 (c) when the person in respect of whom the inquiry is made is a minor, the bond
 shall be executed only by his sureties.
 137. If, on an inquiry under section 135, it is not proved that it is necessary for
 keeping the peace or maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in
 respect of whom the inquiry is made, should execute a bond, the Magistrate shall make an
 Order to give
 security.
 Discharge of
 person
 informed
 against.
40
 entry on the record to that effect, and if such person is in custody only for the purposes of
 the inquiry, shall release him, or, if such person is not in custody, shall discharge him.
 Commencement
 of period for
 which security
 is required.
 Contents of
 bond.
 Power to
 reject sureties.
 Imprisonment
 in default of
 security.
 138. (1) If any person, in respect of whom an order requiring security is made under
 section 125 or section 136, is at the time such order is made, sentenced to, or undergoing a
 sentence of, imprisonment, the period for which such security is required shall commence
 on the expiration of such sentence.
 (2) In other cases such period shall commence on the date of such order unless the
 Magistrate, for sufficient reason, fixes a later date.
 139. The bond to be executed by any such person shall bind him to keep the peace or
 to be of good behaviour, as the case may be, and in the latter case the commission or
 attempt to commit, or the abetment of, any offence punishable with imprisonment, wherever
 it may be committed, is a breach of the bond.
 140. (1) A Magistrate may refuse to accept any surety offered, or may reject any
 surety previously accepted by him or his predecessor under this Chapter on the ground
 that such surety is an unfit person for the purposes of the bond:
 Provided that before so refusing to accept or rejecting any such surety, he shall either
 himself hold an inquiry on oath into the fitness of the surety, or cause such inquiry to be
 held and a report to be made thereon by a Magistrate subordinate to him.
 (2) Such Magistrate shall, before holding the inquiry, give reasonable notice to the
 surety and to the person by whom the surety was offered and shall, in making the inquiry,
 record the substance of the evidence adduced before him.
 (3) If the Magistrate is satisfied, after considering the evidence so adduced either
 before him or before a Magistrate deputed under sub-section (1), and the report of such
 Magistrate (if any), that the surety is an unfit person for the purposes of the bond, he shall
 make an order refusing to accept or rejecting, as the case may be, such surety and recording
 his reasons for so doing:
 Provided that before making an order rejecting any surety who has previously been
 accepted, the Magistrate shall issue his summons or warrant, as he thinks fit, and cause the
 person for whom the surety is bound to appear or to be brought before him.
 141. (1) (a) If any person ordered to give security under section 127 or section 136
 does not give such security on or before the date on which the period for which such
 security is to be given commences, he shall, except in the case next hereinafter mentioned,
 be committed to prison, or, if he is already in prison, be detained in prison until such period
 expires or until within such period he gives the security to the Court or Magistrate who
 made the order requiring it.
 (b) If any person after having executed a bond, with or without sureties without
 sureties for keeping the peace in pursuance of an order of a Magistrate under section 136,
 is proved, to the satisfaction of such Magistrate or his successor-in-office, to have committed
 breach of the bond, such Magistrate or successor-in-office may, after recording the grounds
 of such proof, order that the person be arrested and detained in prison until the expiry of the
 period of the bond and such order shall be without prejudice to any other punishment or
 forfeiture to which the said person may be liable in accordance with law.
 (2) When such person has been ordered by a Magistrate to give security for a period
 exceeding one year, such Magistrate shall, if such person does not give such security as
 aforesaid, issue a warrant directing him to be detained in prison pending the orders of the
 Sessions Judge and the proceedings shall be laid, as soon as conveniently may be, before
 such Court.
 (3) Such Court, after examining such proceedings and requiring from the Magistrate
 any further information or evidence which it thinks necessary, and after giving the concerned
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
41
 person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, may pass such order on the case as it
 thinks fit:
 Provided that the period (if any) for which any person is imprisoned for failure to give
 security shall not exceed three years.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (4) If security has been required in the course of the same proceeding from two or
 more persons in respect of any one of whom the proceedings are referred to the Sessions
 Judge under sub-section (2) such reference shall also include the case of any other of such
 persons who has been ordered to give security, and the provisions of sub-sections (2) and
 (3) shall, in that event, apply to the case of such other person also, except that the period (if
 any) for which he may be imprisoned, shall not exceed the period for which he was ordered
 to give security.
 (5) A Sessions Judge may in his discretion transfer any proceedings laid before him
 under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) to an Additional Sessions Judge and upon such
 transfer, such Additional Sessions Judge may exercise the powers of a Sessions Judge
 under this section in respect of such proceedings.
 (6) If the security is tendered to the officer in charge of the jail, he shall forthwith refer
 the matter to the Court or Magistrate who made the order, and shall await the orders of such
 Court or Magistrate.
 (7) Imprisonment for failure to give security for keeping the peace shall be simple.
 (8) Imprisonment for failure to give security for good behaviour shall, where the
 proceedings have been taken under section 127, be simple, and, where the proceedings
 have been taken under section 128 or section 129, be rigorous or simple as the Court or
 Magistrate in each case directs.
 142. (1) Whenever the District Magistrate in the case of an order passed by an
 Executive Magistrate under section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case
 is of opinion that any person imprisoned for failing to give security under this Chapter may
 be released without hazard to the community or to any other person, he may order such
 person to be discharged.
 (2) Whenever any person has been imprisoned for failing to give security under this
 Chapter, the High Court or Court of Session, or, where the order was made by any other
 Court, District Magistrate, in the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under
 section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case, may make an order reducing
 the amount of the security or the number of sureties or the time for which security has been
 required.
 (3) An order under sub-section (1) may direct the discharge of such person either
 without conditions or upon any conditions which such person accepts:
 Provided that any condition imposed shall cease to be operative when the period for
 which such person was ordered to give security has expired.
 (4) The State Government may prescribe the conditions upon which a conditional
 discharge may be made.
 (5) If any condition upon which any person has been discharged is, in the opinion of
 District Magistrate, in the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under
 section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case by whom the order of discharge
 was made or of his successor, not fulfilled, he may cancel the same.
 (6) When a conditional order of discharge has been cancelled under sub-section (5),
 such person may be arrested by any police officer without warrant, and shall thereupon be
 produced before the District Magistrate, in the case of an order passed by an Executive
 Magistrate under section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case.
 Power to
 release
 persons
 imprisoned for
 failing to give
 security.
42
 (7) Unless such person gives security in accordance with the terms of the original
 order for the unexpired portion of the term for which he was in the first instance committed
 or ordered to be detained (such portion being deemed to be a period equal to the period
 between the date of the breach of the conditions of discharge and the date on which, except
 for such conditional discharge, he would have been entitled to release), District Magistrate,
 in the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 136, or the Chief
 Judicial Magistrate in any other case may remand such person to prison to undergo such
 unexpired portion.
 (8) A person remanded to prison under sub-section (7) shall, subject to the provisions
 of section 141, be released at any time on giving security in accordance with the terms of the
 original order for the unexpired portion aforesaid to the Court or Magistrate by whom such
 order was made, or to its or his successor.
 (9) The High Court or Court of Session may at any time, for sufficient reasons to be
 recorded in writing, cancel any bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour executed
 under this Chapter by any order made by it, and District Magistrate, in the case of an order
 passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 136, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in
 any other case may make such cancellation where such bond was executed under his order
 or under the order of any other Court in his district.
 (10) Any surety for the peaceable conduct or good behaviour of another person
 ordered to execute a bond under this Chapter may at any time apply to the Court making
 such order to cancel the bond and on such application being made, the Court shall issue a
 summons or warrant, as it thinks fit, requiring the person for whom such surety is bound to
 appear or to be brought before it.
 Security for
 unexpired
 period of
 bond.
 Order for
 maintenance
 of wives,
 children and
 parents.
 143. (1) When a person for whose appearance a summons or warrant has been issued
 under the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 140 or under sub-section (10) of section 142,
 appears or is brought before the Magistrate or Court, the Magistrate or Court shall cancel
 the bond executed by such person and shall order such person to give, for the unexpired
 portion of the term of such bond, fresh security of the same description as the original
 security.
 (2) Every such order shall, for the purposes of sections 139 to 142 (both inclusive) be
 deemed to be an order made under section 125 or section 136, as the case may be.
 CHAPTER X
 ORDER FOR MAINTENANCE OF WIVES, CHILDREN AND PARENTS
 144. (1) If any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain—
 (a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or
 (b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or not, unable to
 maintain itself, or
 (c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has
 attained majority, where such child is, by reason of any physical or mental abnormality
 or injury unable to maintain itself, or
 (d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself, a Judicial Magistrate
 of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such person to
 make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child, father or
 mother, at such monthly rate as such Magistrate thinks fit and to pay the same to
 such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct:
 Provided that the Judicial Magistrate may order the father of a minor female child
 referred to in clause (b) to make such allowance, until she attains her majority, if the Judicial
 Magistrate is satisfied that the husband of such minor female child, if married, is not
 possessed of sufficient means

  Provided further that the Judicial Magistrate may, during the pendency of the
 proceeding regarding monthly allowance for the maintenance under this sub-section, order
 such person to make a monthly allowance for the interim maintenance of his wife or such
 child, father or mother, and the expenses of such proceeding which the Judicial Magistrate
 considers reasonable, and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time
 to time direct:
 Provided also that an application for the monthly allowance for the interim maintenance
 and expenses of proceeding under the second proviso shall, as far as possible, be disposed
 of within sixty days from the date of the service of notice of the application to such person.
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter,—
 (a) "minor" means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority
 Act, 1875  is deemed not to have attained his majority;
 (b) "wife" includes a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a
 divorce from, her husband and has not remarried.
 (2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of
 proceeding shall be payable from the date of the order, or, if so ordered, from the date of the
 application for maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the
 case may be.
 (3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to comply with the order,
 any such Magistrate may, for every breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the
 amount due in the manner provided for levying fines, and may sentence such person, for
 the whole or any part of each month's allowance for the maintenance or the interim
 maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be, remaining unpaid after the
 execution of the warrant, to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or until
 payment if sooner made:
 Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount due under
 this section unless application be made to the Court to levy such amount within a period of
 one year from the date on which it became due:
 Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on condition of her
 living with him, and she refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may consider any grounds
 of refusal stated by her, and may make an order under this section notwithstanding such
 offer, if he is satisfied that there is just ground for so doing.
 Explanation.—If a husband has contracted marriage with another woman or keeps a
 mistress, it shall be considered to be just ground for his wife's refusal to live with him.
 (4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an allowance for the maintenance or the interim
 maintenance and expenses of proceeding, from her husband under this section if she is
 living in adultery, or if, without any sufficient reason, she refuses to live with her husband,
 or if they are living separately by mutual consent.
 (5) On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has been made under this section
 is living in adultery, or that without sufficient reason she refuses to live with her husband,
 or that they are living separately by mutual consent, the Judicial Magistrate shall cancel the
 order.
 145. (1) Proceedings under section 144 may be taken against any person in any
 district—
 (a) where he is, or
 (b) where he or his wife resides, or
 (c) where he last resided with his wife, or as the case may be, with the mother of
 the illegitimate child.
 Procedure.
44
 (2) All evidence in such proceedings shall be taken in the presence of the person
 against whom an order for payment of maintenance is proposed to be made, or, when his
 personal attendance is dispensed with, in the presence of his pleader, and shall be recorded
 in the manner prescribed for summons-cases:
 Provided that if the Judicial Magistrate is satisfied that the person against whom an
 order for payment of maintenance is proposed to be made is wilfully avoiding service, or
 wilfully neglecting to attend the Court, the Magistrate may proceed to hear and determine
 the case ex parte and any order so made may be set aside for good cause shown on an
 application made within three months from the date thereof subject to such terms including
 terms as to payment of costs to the opposite party as the Magistrate may think just and
 proper.
 (3) The Court in dealing with applications under section 144 shall have power to make
 such order as to costs as may be just.
 Alteration in
 allowance.
 Enforcement
 of order of
 maintenance.
 146. (1) On proof of a change in the circumstances of any person, receiving, under
 section 144 a monthly allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance, or ordered
 under the same section to pay a monthly allowance for the maintenance, or interim
 maintenance, to his wife, child, father or mother, as the case may be, the Magistrate may
 make such alteration, as he thinks fit, in the allowance for the maintenance or the interim
 maintenance, as the case may be.
 (2) Where it appears to the Judicial Magistrate that in consequence of any decision of
 a competent Civil Court, any order made under section 144 should be cancelled or varied, he
 shall cancel the order or, as the case may be, vary the same accordingly.
 (3) Where any order has been made under section 144 in favour of a woman who has
 been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from, her husband, the Judicial Magistrate
 shall, if he is satisfied that—
 (a) the woman has, after the date of such divorce, remarried, cancel such order
 as from the date of her remarriage;
 (b) the woman has been divorced by her husband and that she has received,
 whether before or after the date of the said order, the whole of the sum which, under
 any customary or personal law applicable to the parties, was payable on such divorce,
 cancel such order,—
 (i) in the case where such sum was paid before such order, from the date
 on which such order was made;
 (ii) in any other case, from the date of expiry of the period, if any, for
 which maintenance has been actually paid by the husband to the woman;
 (c) the woman has obtained a divorce from her husband and that she had
 voluntarily surrendered her rights to maintenance or interim maintenance, as the case
 may be, after her divorce, cancel the order from the date thereof.
 (4) At the time of making any decree for the recovery of any maintenance or dowry by
 any person, to whom a monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or
 any of them has been ordered to be paid under section 144, the Civil Court shall take into
 account the sum which has been paid to, or recovered by, such person as monthly allowance
 for the maintenance and interim maintenance or any of them, as the case may be, in pursuance
 of the said order.
 147. A copy of the order of maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of
 proceedings, as the case may be, shall be given without payment to the person in whose
 favour it is made, or to his guardian, if any, or to the person to whom the allowance for the
 maintenance or the allowance for the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as
 the case may be, is to be paid; and such order may be enforced by any Judicial Magistrate
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
45
 in any place where the person against whom it is made may be, on such Magistrate being
 satisfied as to the identity of the parties and the non-payment of the allowance, or as the
 case may be, expenses, due.
 CHAPTER XI
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND TRANQUILLITY
 A.—Unlawful assemblies
 148. (1) Any Executive Magistrate or officer in charge of a police station or, in the
 absence of such officer in charge, any police officer, not below the rank of a sub-inspector,
 may command any unlawful assembly, or any assembly of five or more persons likely to
 cause a disturbance of the public peace, to disperse; and it shall thereupon be the duty of
 the members of such assembly to disperse accordingly.
 (2) If, upon being so commanded, any such assembly does not disperse, or if, without
 being so commanded, it conducts itself in such a manner as to show a determination not to
 disperse, any Executive Magistrate or police officer referred to in sub-section (1), may
 proceed to disperse such assembly by force, and may require the assistance of any person,
 not being an officer or member of the armed forces and acting as such, for the purpose of
 dispersing such assembly, and, if necessary, arresting and confining the persons who form
 part of it, in order to disperse such assembly or that they may be punished according to law.
 149. (1) If any assembly referred to in sub-section (1) of section 148 cannot otherwise
 be dispersed, and it is necessary for the public security that it should be dispersed, the
 District Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate authorised by him, who is present,
 may cause it to be dispersed by the armed forces.
 (2) Such Magistrate may require any officer in command of any group of persons
 belonging to the armed forces to disperse the assembly with the help of the armed forces
 under his command, and to arrest and confine such persons forming part of it as the
 Executive Magistrate may direct, or as it may be necessary to arrest and confine in order to
 disperse the assembly or to have them punished according to law.
 (3) Every such officer of the armed forces shall obey such requisition in such manner
 as he thinks fit, but in so doing he shall use as little force, and do as little injury to person
 and property, as may be consistent with dispersing the assembly and arresting and detaining
 such persons.
 150. When the public security is manifestly endangered by any such assembly and
 no Executive Magistrate can be communicated with, any commissioned or gazetted officer
 of the armed forces may disperse such assembly with the help of the armed forces under his
 command, and may arrest and confine any persons forming part of it, in order to disperse
 such assembly or that they may be punished according to law; but if, while he is acting
 under this section, it becomes practicable for him to communicate with an Executive
 Magistrate, he shall do so, and shall thenceforward obey the instructions of the Magistrate,
 as to whether he shall or shall not continue such action.
 151. (1) No prosecution against any person for any act purporting to be done under
 section 148, section 149 or section 150 shall be instituted in any Criminal Court except—
 (a) with the sanction of the Central Government where such person is an officer
 or member of the armed forces;
 (b) with the sanction of the State Government in any other case.
 (2) (a) No Executive Magistrate or police officer acting under any of the said sections
 in good faith;
 (b) no person doing any act in good faith in compliance with a requisition under
 section 148 or section 149;
 Dispersal of
 assembly by
 use of civil
 force.
 Use of armed
 forces to
 disperse
 assembly.
 Power of
 certain armed
 force officers
 to disperse
 assembly.
 Protection
 against
 prosecution
 for acts done
 under sections
 148, 149 and
 150.
46
 (c) no officer of the armed forces acting under section 150 in good faith;
 (d) no member of the armed forces doing any act in obedience to any order
 which he was bound to obey,
 shall be deemed to have thereby committed an offence:
 Provided that no case shall be registered under sub-section (1) of section 174 against
 any officer or member of the armed forces for any act done by him in obedience of any order
 which he was bound to obey in the discharge of his official duties, without making a
 preliminary enquiry into the matter:
 Provided further that no officer or member of the armed forces of the Union or any
 police officer of a State shall be arrested for anything done or purported to be done by him
 in obedience of any order which he was bound to obey in the discharge of his official
 duties, except after obtaining the consent of the Central Government or the State Government.
 (3) In this section and in the preceding sections of this Chapter,—
 (a) the expression "armed forces" means the military, naval and air forces,
 operating as land forces and includes any other armed forces of the Union so operating;
 (b) "officer", in relation to the armed forces, means a person commissioned,
 gazetted or in pay as an officer of the armed forces and includes a junior commissioned
 officer, a warrant officer, a petty officer, a non-commissioned officer and a non-gazetted
 officer;
 (c) "member", in relation to the armed forces, means a person in the armed
 forces other than an officer.
 B.—Public nuisances
 Conditional
 order for
 removal of
 nuisance.
 152. (1) Whenever a District Magistrate or a Sub-divisional Magistrate or any other
 Executive Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by the State Government, on
 receiving the report of a police officer or other information and on taking such evidence (if
 any) as he thinks fit, considers—
 (a) that any unlawful obstruction or nuisance should be removed from any
 public place or from any way, river or channel which is or may be lawfully used by the
 public; or
 (b) that the conduct of any trade or occupation, or the keeping of any goods or
 merchandise, is injurious to the health or physical comfort of the community, and that
 in consequence such trade or occupation should be prohibited or regulated or such
 goods or merchandise should be removed or the keeping thereof regulated; or
 (c) that the construction of any building, or, the disposal of any substance, as
 is likely to occasion configuration or explosion, should be prevented or stopped; or
 (d) that any building, tent or structure, or any tree is in such a condition that it
 is likely to fall and thereby cause injury to persons living or carrying on business in
 the neighbourhood or passing by, and that in consequence the removal, repair or
 support of such building, tent or structure, or the removal or support of such tree, is
 necessary; or
 (e) that any tank, well or excavation adjacent to any such way or public place
 should be fenced in such manner as to prevent danger arising to the public; or
 (f) that any dangerous animal should be destroyed, confined or otherwise
 disposed of, such Magistrate may make a conditional order requiring the person
 causing such obstruction or nuisance, or carrying on such trade or occupation, or
 keeping any such goods or merchandise, or owning, possessing or controlling such
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
47
 building, tent, structure, substance, tank, well or excavation, or owning or possessing
 such animal or tree, within a time to be fixed in the order—
 (i) to remove such obstruction or nuisance; or
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (ii) to desist from carrying on, or to remove or regulate in such manner as
 may be directed, such trade or occupation, or to remove such goods or
 merchandise, or to regulate the keeping thereof in such manner as may be
 directed; or
 (iii) to prevent or stop the construction of such building, or to alter the
 disposal of such substance; or
 (iv) to remove, repair or support such building, tent or structure, or to
 remove or support such trees; or
 (v) to fence such tank, well or excavation; or
 (vi) to destroy, confine or dispose of such dangerous animal in the manner
 provided in the said order,
 or, if he objects so to do, to appear before himself or some other Executive Magistrate
 subordinate to him at a time and place to be fixed by the order, and show cause, in the
 manner hereinafter provided, why the order should not be made absolute.
 (2) No order duly made by a Magistrate under this section shall be called in question
 in any Civil Court.
 Explanation.—A "public place" includes also property belonging to the State,
 camping grounds and grounds left unoccupied for sanitary or recreative purposes.
 153. (1) The order shall, if practicable, be served on the person against whom it is
 made, in the manner herein provided for service of summons.
 (2) If such order cannot be so served, it shall be notified by proclamation or by
 electronic communication in such manner as the State Government may, by rules, direct,
 and a copy thereof shall be stuck up at such place or places as may be fittest for conveying
 the information to such person.
 154. The person against whom such order is made shall—
 (a) perform, within the time and in the manner specified in the order, the act
 directed thereby; or
 (b) appear in accordance with such order and show cause against the same;
 and such appearance or hearing may be permitted through audio video conferencing.
 155. If the person against whom an order is made under section 154 does not perform
 such act or appear and show cause, he shall be liable to the penalty specified in that behalf
 in section 221 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and the order shall be made absolute.
 156. (1) Where an order is made under section 152 for the purpose of preventing
 obstruction, nuisance or danger to the public in the use of any way, river, channel or place,
 the Magistrate shall, on the appearance before him of the person against whom the order
 was made, question him as to whether he denies the existence of any public right in respect
 of the way, river, channel or place, and if he does so, the Magistrate shall, before proceeding
 under section 157, inquire into the matter.
 (2) If in such inquiry the Magistrate finds that there is any reliable evidence in support
 of such denial, he shall stay the proceedings until the matter of the existence of such right
 has been decided by a competent Court; and, if he finds that there is no such evidence, he
 shall proceed as laid down in section 157.
 (3) A person who has, on being questioned by the Magistrate under sub-section (1),
 Service or
 notification of
 order.
 Person to
 whom order is
 addressed to
 obey or show
 cause.
 Penalty for
 failure to
 comply with
 section 154.
 Procedure
 where
 existence of
 public right is
 denied.
48
 fail to deny the existence of a public right of the nature therein referred to, or who, having
 made such denial, has failed to adduce reliable evidence in support thereof, shall not in the
 subsequent proceedings be permitted to make any such denial.
 Procedure
 where the
 person against
 whom order is
 made under
 section 152
 appears to
 show cause.
 Power of
 Magistrate to
 direct local
 investigation
 and
 examination
 of an expert.
 Power of
 Magistrate to
 furnish written
 instructions,
 etc.
 Procedure on
 order being
 made absolute
 and
 consequences
 of
 disobedience.
 Injunction
 pending
 inquiry.
 157. (1) If the person against whom an order under section 152 is made appears and
 shows cause against the order, the Magistrate shall take evidence in the matter as in a
 summons-case.
 (2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that the order, either as originally made or subject to
 such modification as he considers necessary, is reasonable and proper, the order shall be
 made absolute without modification or, as the case may be, with such modification.
 (3) If the Magistrate is not so satisfied, no further proceedings shall be taken in the
 case:
 Provided that the proceedings under this section shall be completed, as soon as
 possible, within a period of ninety days, which may be extended for the reasons to be
 recorded in writing, to one hundred and twenty days.
 158. The Magistrate may, for the purposes of an inquiry under section 156 or
 section 157—
 (a) direct a local investigation to be made by such person as he thinks fit; or
 (b) summon and examine an expert.
 159. (1) Where the Magistrate directs a local investigation by any person under
 section 158, the Magistrate may—
 (a) furnish such person with such written instructions as may seem necessary
 for his guidance;
 (b) declare by whom the whole or any part of the necessary expenses of the
 local investigation shall be paid.
 (2) The report of such person may be read as evidence in the case.
 (3) Where the Magistrate summons and examines an expert under section 158, the
 Magistrate may direct by whom the costs of such summoning and examination shall be
 paid.
 160. (1) When an order has been made absolute under section 155 or section 157, the
 Magistrate shall give notice of the same to the person against whom the order was made,
 and shall further require him to perform the act directed by the order within the time to be
 fixed in the notice, and inform him that, in case of disobedience, he shall be liable to the
 penalty provided by section 221 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 (2) If such act is not performed within the time fixed, the Magistrate may cause it to be
 performed, and may recover the cost of performing it, either by the sale of any building,
 goods or other property removed by his order, or by the distress and sale of any other
 movable property of such person within or without such Magistrate's local jurisdiction, and
 if such other property is without such jurisdiction, the order shall authorise its attachment
 and sale when endorsed by the Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the property to
 be attached is found.
 (3) No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good faith under this section.
 161. (1) If a Magistrate making an order under section 152 considers that immediate
 measures should be taken to prevent imminent danger or injury of a serious kind to the
 public, he may issue such an injunction to the person against whom the order was made, as
 is required to obviate or prevent such danger or injury pending the determination of the
 matter.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
49
 (2) In default of such person forthwith obeying such injunction, the Magistrate may
 himself use, or cause to be used, such means as he thinks fit to obviate such danger or to
 prevent such injury.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 (3) No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good faith by a Magistrate under
 this section.
 162. A District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate, or any other Executive
 Magistrate or Deputy Commissioner of Police empowered by the State Government or the
 District Magistrate in this behalf, may order any person not to repeat or continue a public
 nuisance, as defined in the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, or any special or local law.
 C.—Urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger
 163. (1) In cases where, in the opinion of a District Magistrate, a Sub-divisional
 Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate specially empowered by the State Government
 in this behalf, there is sufficient ground for proceeding under this section and immediate
 prevention or speedy remedy is desirable, such Magistrate may, by a written order stating
 the material facts of the case and served in the manner provided by section 153, direct any
 person to abstain from a certain act or to take certain order with respect to certain property
 in his possession or under his management, if such Magistrate considers that such direction
 is likely to prevent, or tends to prevent, obstruction, annoyance or injury to any person
 lawfully employed, or danger to human life, health or safety or a disturbance of the public
 tranquility, or a riot, or an affray.
 (2) An order under this section may, in cases of emergency or in cases where the
 circumstances do not admit of the serving in due time of a notice upon the person against
 whom the order is directed, be passed ex parte.
 (3) An order under this section may be directed to a particular individual, or to persons
 residing in a particular place or area, or to the public generally when frequenting or visiting
 a particular place or area.
 (4) No order under this section shall remain in force for more than two months from
 the making thereof:
 Provided that if the State Government considers it necessary so to do for preventing
 danger to human life, health or safety or for preventing a riot or any affray, it may, by
 notification, direct that an order made by a Magistrate under this section shall remain in
 force for such further period not exceeding six months from the date on which the order
 made by the Magistrate would have, but for such order, expired, as it may specify in the said
 notification.
 (5) Any Magistrate may, either on his own motion or on the application of any person
 aggrieved, rescind or alter any order made under this section by himself or any Magistrate
 subordinate to him or by his predecessor-in-office.
 (6) The State Government may, either on its own motion or on the application of any
 person aggrieved, rescind or alter any order made by it under the proviso to sub-section (4).
 (7) Where an application under sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) is received, the
 Magistrate, or the State Government, as the case may be, shall afford to the applicant an
 early opportunity of appearing before him or it, either in person or by pleader and showing
 cause against the order; and if the Magistrate or the State Government, as the case may be,
 rejects the application wholly or in part, he or it shall record in writing the reasons for so
 doing.
 D.—Disputes as to immovable property
 164. (1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is satisfied from a report of a police
 officer or upon other information that a dispute likely to cause a breach of the peace exists
 concerning any land or water or the boundaries thereof, within his local jurisdiction, he
 shall make an order in writing, stating the grounds of his being so satisfied, and requiring
 the parties concerned in such dispute to attend his Court in person or by pleader, on a
 Magistrate
 may prohibit
 repetition or
 continuance
 of public
 nuisance.
 Power to issue
 order in urgent
 cases of
 nuisance or
 apprehended
 danger.
 Procedure
 where dispute
 concerning
 land or water
 is likely to
 cause breach
 of peace.
50
 specified date and time, and to put in written statements of their respective claims as
 respects the fact of actual possession of the subject of dispute.
 (2) For the purposes of this section, the expression "land or water" includes buildings,
 markets, fisheries, crops or other produce of land, and the rents or profits of any such
 property.
 (3) A copy of the order shall be served in the manner provided by this Sanhita for the
 service of summons upon such person or persons as the Magistrate may direct, and at least
 one copy shall be published by being affixed to some conspicuous place at or near the
 subject of dispute.
 (4) The Magistrate shall, without reference to the merits or the claims of any of the
 parties to a right to possess the subject of dispute, peruse the statements so put in, hear the
 parties, receive all such evidence as may be produced by them, take such further evidence,
 if any, as he thinks necessary, and, if possible, decide whether any and which of the parties
 was, at the date of the order made by him under sub-section (1), in possession of the
 subject of dispute:
 Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that any party has been forcibly and
 wrongfully dispossessed within two months next before the date on which the report of a
 police officer or other information was received by the Magistrate, or after that date and
 before the date of his order under sub-section (1), he may treat the party so dispossessed
 as if that party had been in possession on the date of his order under sub-section (1).
 (5) Nothing in this section shall preclude any party so required to attend, or any other
 person interested, from showing that no such dispute as aforesaid exists or has existed; and
 in such case the Magistrate shall cancel his said order, and all further proceedings thereon
 shall be stayed, but, subject to such cancellation, the order of the Magistrate under
 sub-section (1) shall be final.
 (6) (a) If the Magistrate decides that one of the parties was, or should under the
 proviso to sub-section (4) be treated as being, in such possession of the said subject of
 dispute, he shall issue an order declaring such party to be entitled to possession thereof
 until evicted therefrom in due course of law, and forbidding all disturbance of such possession
 until such eviction; and when he proceeds under the proviso to sub-section (4), may
 restore to possession the party forcibly and wrongfully dispossessed.
 (b) The order made under this sub-section shall be served and published in the
 manner laid down in sub-section (3).
 (7) When any party to any such proceeding dies, the Magistrate may cause the legal
 representative of the deceased party to be made a party to the proceeding and shall thereupon
 continue the inquiry, and if any question arises as to who the legal representative of a
 deceased party for the purposes of such proceeding is, all persons claiming to be
 representatives of the deceased party shall be made parties thereto.
 (8) If the Magistrate is of opinion that any crop or other produce of the property, the
 subject of dispute in a proceeding under this section pending before him, is subject to
 speedy and natural decay, he may make an order for the proper custody or sale of such
 property, and, upon the completion of the inquiry, shall make such order for the disposal of
 such property, or the sale-proceeds thereof, as he thinks fit.
 (9) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, at any stage of the proceedings under this
 section, on the application of either party, issue a summons to any witness directing him to
 attend or to produce any document or thing.
 (10) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to be in derogation of powers of the
 Magistrate to proceed under section 126.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
51
 5
 10
 5 of 1908.
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 165. (1) If the Magistrate at any time after making the order under sub-section (1) of
 section 164 considers the case to be one of emergency, or if he decides that none of the
 parties was then in such possession as is referred to in section 164, or if he is unable to
 satisfy himself as to which of them was then in such possession of the subject of dispute,
 he may attach the subject of dispute until a competent Court has determined the rights of
 the parties thereto with regard to the person entitled to the possession thereof:
 Provided that such Magistrate may withdraw the attachment at any time if he is
 satisfied that there is no longer any likelihood of breach of the peace with regard to the
 subject of dispute.
 (2) When the Magistrate attaches the subject of dispute, he may, if no receiver in
 relation to such subject of dispute has been appointed by any Civil Court, make such
 arrangements as he considers proper for looking after the property or if he thinks fit,
 appoint a receiver thereof, who shall have, subject to the control of the Magistrate, all the
 powers of a receiver appointed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908:
 Provided that in the event of a receiver being subsequently appointed in relation to
 the subject of dispute by any Civil Court, the Magistrate—
 (a) shall order the receiver appointed by him to hand over the possession of the
 subject of dispute to the receiver appointed by the Civil Court and shall thereafter
 discharge the receiver appointed by him;
 (b) may make such other incidental or consequential orders as may be just.
 166. (1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is satisfied from the report of a police
 officer or upon other information, that a dispute likely to cause a breach of the peace exists
 regarding any alleged right of user of any land or water within his local jurisdiction, whether
 such right be claimed as an easement or otherwise, he shall make an order in writing, stating
 the grounds of his being so satisfied and requiring the parties concerned in such dispute to
 attend his Court in person or by pleader on a specified date and time and to put in written
 statements of their respective claims.
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "land or water"
 has the meaning given to it in sub-section (2) of section 164.
 (2) The Magistrate shall peruse the statements so put in, under sub-section (1), hear
 the parties, receive all such evidence as may be produced by them respectively, consider
 the effect of such evidence, take such further evidence, if any, as he thinks necessary and,
 if possible, decide whether such right exists; and the provisions of section 164 shall, so far
 as may be, apply in the case of such inquiry.
 (3) If it appears to such Magistrate that such rights exist, he may make an order
 prohibiting any interference with the exercise of such right, including, in a proper case, an
 order for the removal of any obstruction in the exercise of any such right:
 Provided that no such order shall be made where the right is exercisable at all times of
 the year, unless such right has been exercised within three months next before the receipt
 under sub-section (1) of the report of a police officer or other information leading to the
 institution of the inquiry, or where the right is exercisable only at particular season or on
 particular occasion, unless the right has been exercised during the last of such seasons or
 on the last of such occasions before such receipt.
 (4) When in any proceedings commenced under sub-section (1) of section 164 the
 Magistrate finds that the dispute is as regards an alleged right of user of land or water, he
 may, after recording his reasons, continue with the proceedings as if they had been
 commenced under sub-section (1), and when in any proceedings commenced under
 sub-section (1) the Magistrate finds that the dispute should be dealt with under section
 164, he may, after recording his reasons, continue with the proceedings as if they had been
 commenced under sub-section (1) of section 164.
 Power to
 attach subject
 of dispute and
 to appoint
 receiver.
 Dispute
 concerning
 right of use of
 land or water.
52
 Local inquiry.
 Police to
 prevent
 cognizable
 offences.
 Information
 of design to
 commit
 cognizable
 offences.
 Arrest to
 prevent
 commission of
 cognizable
 offences.
 Prevention of
 injury to
 public
 property.
 Persons bound
 to conform to
 lawful
 directions of
 police.
 Information
 in cognizable
 cases.
 167. (1) Whenever a local inquiry is necessary for the purposes of section 164,
 section 165 or section 166, a District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate may depute
 any Magistrate subordinate to him to make the inquiry, and may furnish him with such
 written instructions as may seem necessary for his guidance, and may declare by whom the
 whole or any part of the necessary expenses of the inquiry shall be paid.
 (2) The report of the person so deputed may be read as evidence in the case.
 (3) When any costs have been incurred by any party to a proceeding under
 section 164, section 165 or section 166, the Magistrate passing a decision may direct by
 whom such costs shall be paid, whether by such party or by any other party to the proceeding,
 and whether in whole or in part or proportion and such costs may include any expenses
 incurred in respect of witnesses and of pleaders' fees, which the Court may consider reasonable.
