 CHAPTER XII
 PREVENTIVE ACTION OF THE POLICE
 168. Every police officer may interpose for the purpose of preventing, and shall, to
 the best of his ability, prevent, the commission of any cognizable offence.
 169. Every police officer receiving information of a design to commit any cognizable
 offence shall communicate such information to the police officer to whom he is subordinate,
 and to any other officer whose duty it is to prevent or take cognizance of the commission of
 any such offence.
 170. (1) A police officer knowing of a design to commit any cognizable offence may
 arrest, without orders from a Judicial Magistrate and without a warrant, the person so
 designing, if it appears to such officer that the commission of the offence cannot be otherwise
 prevented.
 (2) No person arrested under sub-section (1) shall be detained in custody for a period
 exceeding twenty-four hours from the time of his arrest unless his further detention is
 required or authorised under any other provisions of this Sanhita or of any other law for the
 time being in force.
 171.  A police officer may of his own authority interpose to prevent any injury attempted
 to be committed in his view to any public property, movable or immovable, or the removal or
 injury of any public landmark, buoy or other mark used for navigation.
 172. (1) All persons shall be bound to conform to the lawful directions of a police
 officer given in fulfilment of any of his duty under this Chapter.
 (2) A police officer may detain or remove any person resisting, refusing, ignoring or
 disregarding to conform to any direction given by him under sub-section (1) and may either
 take such person before a Judicial Magistrate or, in petty cases, release him when the
 occasion is past.
 CHAPTER XIII
 INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE
 173. (1) Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence,
 irrespective of the area where the offence is committed may be given orally or by electronic
 communication and if given to an officer in charge of a police station,—
 (i) orally, it shall be reduced to writing by him or under his direction, and be read
 over to the informant; and every such information, whether given in writing or reduced
 to writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it;
 (ii) by electronic communication, it shall be taken on record by him on being
 signed within three days by the person giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such officer in such form
 as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf:
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 Provided that if the information is given by the woman against whom an offence
 under section 64, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70, section 73, section 74,
 section 75, section 76, section 77, section 78 or section 122 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
 Sanhita, 2023 is alleged to have been committed or attempted, then such information shall
 be recorded, by a woman police officer or any woman officer:
 Provided further that—
 (a) in the event that the person against whom an offence under section 354,
 section 67, section 68, sub-section (2) of section 69, sub-section (1) of section 70,
 section 71, section 74, section 75, section 76, section 77  or section 79 of the Bharatiya
 Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is alleged to have been committed or attempted, is temporarily or
 permanently mentally or physically disabled, then such information shall be recorded
 by a police officer, at the residence of the person seeking to report such offence or at
 a convenient place of such person's choice, in the presence of an interpreter or a
 special educator, as the case may be;
 (b) the recording of such information shall be videographed;
 (c) the police officer shall get the statement of the person recorded by a Judicial
 Magistrate under clause (a) of sub-section (6) of section 183 as soon as possible.
 (2) A copy of the information as recorded under sub-section (1) shall be given forthwith,
 free of cost, to the informant or the victim.
 (3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 175, on receipt of
 information relating to the commission of any cognizable offence, which is made punishable
 for three years or more but less than seven years, the officer in-charge of the police station
 may with the prior permission from an officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent
 of Police, considering the nature and gravity of the offence,—
 (i) proceed to conduct preliminary enquiry to ascertain whether there exists a
 prima facie case for proceeding in the matter within a period of fourteen days; or
 (ii) proceed with investigation when there exists a prima facie case.
 (4) Any person aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an officer in charge of a police
 station to record the information referred to in sub-section (1), may send the substance of
 such information, in writing and by post, to the Superintendent of Police concerned who, if
 satisfied that such information discloses the commission of a cognizable offence, shall
 either investigate the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by any police officer
 subordinate to him, in the manner provided by this Sanhita, and such officer shall have all
 the powers of an officer in charge of the police station in relation to that offence failing
 which he may make an application under sub-section (3) of section 175 to the Magistrate.
 174. (1) When information is given to an officer in charge of a police station of the
 commission within the limits of such station of a non-cognizable offence, he shall enter or
 cause to be entered the substance of the information in a book to be kept by such officer in
 such form as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf, and,—
 (i) refer the informant to the Magistrate;
 (ii) forward the daily diary report of all such cases fortnightly to the Magistrate.
 (2) No police officer shall investigate a non-cognizable case without the order of a
 Magistrate having power to try such case or commit the case for trial.
 (3) Any police officer receiving such order may exercise the same powers in respect of
 the investigation (except the power to arrest without warrant) as an officer in charge of a
 police station may exercise in a cognizable case.
 Information
 as to non
cognizable
 cases and
 investigation
 of such cases.
54
 (4) Where a case relates to two or more offences of which at least one is cognizable,
 the case shall be deemed to be a cognizable case, notwithstanding that the other offences
 are non-cognizable.
 Police
 officer's power
 to investigate
 cognizable
 case.
 Procedure for
 investigation.
 175. (1) Any officer in charge of a police station may, without the order of a Magistrate,
 investigate any cognizable case which a Court having jurisdiction over the local area within
 the limits of such station would have power to inquire into or try under the provisions of
 Chapter XIV:
 Provided that considering the nature and gravity of the offence, the Superintendent
 of Police may either himself investigate or require the Deputy Superintendent of Police to
 investigate the offence.
 (2) No proceeding of a police officer in any such case shall at any stage be called in
 question on the ground that the case was one which such officer was not empowered under
 this section to investigate.
 (3) Any Judicial Magistrate empowered under section 210 may, after considering the
 application made under clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 173 and submission made in
 this regard by the police officer, order such an investigation as above-mentioned.
 (4) Any Judicial Magistrate empowered under section 210, may upon receiving a
 complaint against a public servant arising in course of the discharge of his official duties,
 take cognizance, subject to—
 (a) receiving a report containing facts and circumstances of the incident from
 the officer superior to him; and
 (b) after consideration of the assertions made by the public servant as to the
 situation that led to the incident so alleged.
 176. (1) If, from information received or otherwise, an officer in charge of a police
 station has reason to suspect the commission of an offence which he is empowered under
 section 175 to investigate, he shall forthwith send a report of the same to a Magistrate
 empowered to take cognizance of such offence upon a police report and shall proceed in
 person, or shall depute one of his subordinate officers not being below such rank as the
 State Government may, by general or special order, prescribe in this behalf, to proceed, to
 the spot, to investigate the facts and circumstances of the case, and, if necessary, to take
 measures for the discovery and arrest of the offender:
 Provided that—
 (a) when information as to the commission of any such offence is given against
 any person by name and the case is not of a serious nature, the officer in charge of a
 police station need not proceed in person or depute a subordinate officer to make an
 investigation on the spot;
 (b) if it appears to the officer in charge of a police station that there is no
 sufficient ground for entering on an investigation, he shall not investigate the case:
 Provided further that in relation to an offence of rape, the recording of statement of
 the victim shall be conducted at the residence of the victim or in the place of her choice and
 as far as practicable by a woman police officer in the presence of her parents or guardian or
 near relatives or social worker of the locality:
 Provided also that statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded
 through any audio-video electronic means preferably cell phone.
 (2) In each of the cases mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of the first proviso to
 sub-section (1), the officer in charge of the police station shall state in his report the
 reasons for not fully complying with the requirements of that sub-section by him, and,
 forward the daily diary report fortnightly to the Magistrate and in the case mentioned in
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
55
 clause (b) of the said proviso, the officer shall also forthwith notify to the informant, if any,
 in such manner as may be prescribed.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (3) On receipt of every information relating to the commission of an offence which is
 made punishable for seven years or more, the officer in charge of a police station shall, from
 such date, as may be notified within a period of five years by the State Government in this
 regard, cause the forensics expert to visit the crimes scene to collect forensic evidence in
 the offence and also cause videography of the process on mobile phone or any other
 electronic device:
 Provided that where forensics facility is not available in respect of any such offence,
 the State Government shall, until the facility in respect of that matter is developed or made
 in the State, notify the utilisation of such facility of any other State.
 177. (1) Every report sent to a Magistrate under section 176 shall, if the State
 Government so directs, be submitted through such superior officer of police as the State
 Government, by general or special order, appoints in that behalf.
 (2) Such superior officer may give such instructions to the officer in charge of the
 police station as he thinks fit, and shall, after recording such instructions on such report,
 transmit the same without delay to the Magistrate.
 178. The Magistrate, on receiving report under section 176, may direct an investigation,
 or, if he thinks fit, at once proceed, or depute any Magistrate subordinate to him to proceed,
 to hold a preliminary inquiry into, or otherwise to dispose of, the case in the manner
 provided in this Sanhita.
 179. (1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter may, by order
 in writing, require the attendance before himself of any person being within the limits of his
 own or any adjoining station who, from the information given or otherwise, appears to be
 acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case; and such person shall attend as so
 required:
 Provided that no male person under the age of fifteen years or above the age of
 sixty years or a woman or a mentally or physically disabled person or a person with acute illness
 shall be required to attend at any place other than the place in which such person resides:
 Provided further that if such person is willing to attend the police station or at any
 other place within the limits of such police station, such person may be permitted so to do.
 (2) The State Government may, by rules made in this behalf, provide for the payment
 by the police officer of the reasonable expenses of every person, attending under
 sub-section (1) at any place other than his residence.
 180. (1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter, or any police
 officer not below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special order,
 prescribe in this behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may examine orally any
 person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case.
 (2) Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating to such case put
 to him by such officer, other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency
 to expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture.
 (3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course
 of an examination under this section; and if he does so, he shall make a separate and true
 record of the statement of each such person whose statement he records:
 Provided that statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded by
 audio-video electronic means:
 Provided further that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under
 section 64, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70, section 71, section 73, section 74,
 Report how
 submitted.
 Power to hold
 investigation
 or preliminary
 inquiry.
 Police
 officer's power
 to require
 attendance of
 witnesses.
 Examination
 of witnesses
 by police.
56
 section 75, section 76, section 77 or section 78 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is
 alleged to have been committed or attempted, shall be recorded, by a woman police officer
 or any woman officer.
 Statements to
 police and use
 thereof.
 No inducement
 to be offered.
 Recording of
 confessions
 and
 statements.
 181. (1) No statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an
 investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be signed by the person
 making it; nor shall any such statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary or
 otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for any purpose, save as
 hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at
 the time when such statement was made:
 Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial
 whose statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if
 duly proved, may be used by the accused, and with the permission of the Court, by the
 prosecution, to contradict such witness in the manner provided by section 148 of the
 Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023; and when any part of such statement is so used, any
 part thereof may also be used in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose
 only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross-examination.
 (2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within
 the provisions of clause (1) of section 26 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023; or to
 affect the provisions of section 23 of that Adhiniyam.
 Explanation.— An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the statement referred
 to in sub-section (1) may amount to contradiction if the same appears to be significant and
 otherwise relevant having regard to the context in which such omission occurs and whether
 any omission amounts to a contradiction in the particular context shall be a question of fact.
 182. (1) No police officer or other person in authority shall offer or make, or cause to
 be offered or made, any such inducement, threat or promise as is mentioned in section 22 of
 the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023.
 (2) But no police officer or other person shall prevent, by any caution or otherwise,
 any person from making in the course of any investigation under this Chapter any statement
 which he may be disposed to make of his own free will:
 Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the provisions of sub-section (4)
 of section 184.
 183. (1) Any Judicial Magistrate of the District in which the information about
 commission of any offence has been registered, may, whether or not he has jurisdiction in
 the case, record any confession or statement made to him in the course of an investigation
 under this Chapter or under any other law for the time being in force, or at any time afterwards
 but before the commencement of the inquiry or trial:
 Provided that any confession or statement made under this sub-section may also be
 recorded in the presence of the advocate of the person accused of an offence:
 Provided further that no confession shall be recorded by a police officer on whom any
 power of a Magistrate has been conferred under any law for the time being in force.
 (2) The Magistrate shall, before recording any such confession, explain to the person
 making it that he is not bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, it may be used
 as evidence against him; and the Magistrate shall not record any such confession unless,
 upon questioning the person making it, he has reason to believe that it is being made
 voluntarily.
 (3) If at any time before the confession is recorded, the person appearing before the
 Magistrate states that he is not willing to make the confession, the Magistrate shall not
 authorise the detention of such person in police custody.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
57
 (4) Any such confession shall be recorded in the manner provided in section 316 for
 recording the examination of an accused person and shall be signed by the person making
 the confession; and the Magistrate shall make a memorandum at the foot of such record to
 the following effect:—
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 "I have explained to (name) that he is not bound to make a confession and that,
 if he does so, any confession he may make may be used as evidence against him and
 I believe that this confession was voluntarily made. It was taken in my presence and
 hearing, and was read over to the person making it and admitted by him to be correct,
 and it contains a full and true account of the statement made by him.
 (Signed) A. B.
 Magistrate."
 (5) Any statement (other than a confession) made under sub-section (1) shall be
 recorded in such manner hereinafter provided for the recording of evidence as is, in the
 opinion of the Judicial Magistrate, best fitted to the circumstances of the case; and the
 Judicial Magistrate shall have power to administer oath to the person whose statement is so
 recorded.
 (6) (a) In cases punishable under section 66, section 67, section 68, section 70,
 section 71, section 73, section 74, section 75, section 76, section 77, sub-section (1) or
 sub-section (2) of section 74, or section 78 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the Judicial
 Magistrate shall record the statement of the person against whom such offence has been
 committed in the manner specified in sub-section (5), as soon as the commission of the
 offence is brought to the notice of the police:
 Provided that such statement shall, as far as practicable, be recorded by a woman
 Judicial Magistrate and in her absence by a male Judicial Magistrate in the presence of a
 woman:
 Provided further that in cases relating to the offences punishable with imprisonment
 for ten years or more or imprisonment for life or with death, the Judicial Magistrate shall
 record the statement of the witness brought before him by the police officer:
 Provided also that if the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently
 mentally or physically disabled, the Magistrate shall take the assistance of an interpreter or
 a special educator in recording the statement:
 Provided also that if the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently
 mentally or physically disabled, the statement made by the person, with the assistance of
 an interpreter or a special educator, shall be recorded through audio-video electronic means
 preferably cell phone.
 (b) A statement recorded under clause (a) of a person, who is temporarily or
 permanently mentally or physically disabled, shall be considered a statement in lieu of
 examination-in-chief, as specified in section 142 of the Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023
 such that the maker of the statement can be cross-examined on such statement, without the
 need for recording the same at the time of trial.
 (7) The Magistrate recording a confession or statement under this section shall
 forward it to the Magistrate by whom the case is to be inquired into or tried.
 184. (1) Where, during the stage when an offence of committing rape or attempt to
 commit rape is under investigation, it is proposed to get the person of the woman with
 whom rape is alleged or attempted to have been committed or attempted, examined by a
 medical expert, such examination shall be conducted by a registered medical practitioner
 employed in a hospital run by the Government or a local authority and in the absence of
 such a practitioner, by any other registered medical practitioner, with the consent of such
 woman or of a person competent to give such consent on her behalf and such woman shall
 Medical
 examination
 of the victim
 of rape.
58
 be sent to such registered medical practitioner within twenty-four hours from the time of
 receiving the information relating to the commission of such offence.
 (2) The registered medical practitioner, to whom such woman is sent, shall, without
 delay, examine her person and prepare a report of his examination giving the following
 particulars, namely:—
 (i) the name and address of the woman and of the person by whom she was
 brought;
 (ii) the age of the woman;
 (iii) the description of material taken from the person of the woman for
 DNA profiling;
 (iv) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the woman;
 (v) general mental condition of the woman; and
 (vi) other material particulars in reasonable detail.
 (3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.
 (4) The report shall specifically record that the consent of the woman or of the person
 competent to give such consent on her behalf to such examination had been obtained.
 (5) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be
 noted in the report.
 (6) The registered medical practitioner shall, within a period of seven days forward
 the report to the investigating officer who shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in
 section 193 as part of the documents referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (6) of that
 section.
 (7) Nothing in this section shall be construed as rendering lawful any examination
 without the consent of the woman or of any person competent to give such consent on her
 behalf.
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "examination" and "registered
 medical practitioner" shall have the same meanings as respectively assigned to them in
 section 51.
 Search by
 police officer.
 185. (1) Whenever an officer in charge of a police station or a police officer making an
 investigation has reasonable grounds for believing that anything necessary for the purposes
 of an investigation into any offence which he is authorised to investigate may be found in
 any place within the limits of the police station of which he is in charge, or to which he is
 attached, and that such thing cannot in his opinion be otherwise obtained without undue
 delay, such officer may, after recording in writing the grounds of his belief in the case-diary
 and specifying in such writing, so far as possible, the thing for which search is to be made,
 search, or cause search to be made, for such thing in any place within the limits of such
 station.
 (2) A police officer proceeding under sub-section (1), shall, if practicable, conduct the
 search in person.
 Provided that the search conducted under this section shall be recorded through
 audio-video electronic means preferably by mobile phone.
 (3) If he is unable to conduct the search in person, and there is no other person
 competent to make the search present at the time, he may, after recording in writing his
 reasons for so doing, require any officer subordinate to him to make the search, and he shall
 deliver to such subordinate officer an order in writing, specifying the place to be searched,
 and so far as possible, the thing for which search is to be made; and such subordinate
 officer may thereupon search for such thing in such place.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
59
 (4) The provisions of this Sanhita as to search-warrants and the general provisions as
 to searches contained in section 103 shall, so far as may be, apply to a search made under
 this section.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 (5) Copies of any record made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) shall forthwith,
 but not later than forty-eight hours, be sent to the nearest Magistrate empowered to take
 cognizance of the offence, and the owner or occupier of the place searched shall, on
 application, be furnished, free of cost, with a copy of the same by the Magistrate.
 186. (1) An officer in charge of a police station or a police officer not being below the
 rank of sub-inspector making an investigation may require an officer in charge of another
 police station, whether in the same or a different district, to cause a search to be made in any
 place, in any case in which the former officer might cause such search to be made, within the
 limits of his own station.
 (2) Such officer, on being so required, shall proceed according to the provisions of
 section 185, and shall forward the thing found, if any, to the officer at whose request the
 search was made.
 (3) Whenever there is reason to believe that the delay occasioned by requiring an
 officer in charge of another police station to cause a search to be made under
 sub-section (1) might result in evidence of the commission of an offence being concealed or
 destroyed, it shall be lawful for an officer in charge of a police station or a police officer
 making any investigation under this Chapter to search, or cause to be searched, any place
 in the limits of another police station in accordance with the provisions of section 185, as if
 such place were within the limits of his own police station.
 (4) Any officer conducting a search under sub-section (3) shall forthwith send notice
 of the search to the officer in charge of the police station within the limits of which such
 place is situate, and shall also send with such notice a copy of the list (if any) prepared
 under section 103, and shall also send to the nearest Magistrate empowered to take
 cognizance of the offence, copies of the records referred to in sub-sections (1) and (3) of
 section 185.
 (5) The owner or occupier of the place searched shall, on application, be furnished
 free of cost with a copy of any record sent to the Magistrate under sub-section (4).
 187. (1) Whenever any person is arrested and detained in custody, and it appears
 that the investigation cannot be completed within the period of twenty-four hours fixed by
 section 58, and there are grounds for believing that the accusation or information is
 well-founded, the officer in charge of the police station or the police officer making the
 investigation, if he is not below the rank of sub-inspector, shall forthwith transmit to the
 nearest Judicial Magistrate a copy of the entries in the diary hereinafter specified relating to
 the case, and shall at the same time forward the accused to such Magistrate.
 (2) The Judicial Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under this
 section may, irrespective of whether he has or has no jurisdiction to try the case, after taking
 into consideration the status of the accused person as to whether he is not released on bail
 or his bail has not been cancelled, authorise, from time to time, the detention of the accused
 in such custody as such Magistrate thinks fit, for a term not exceeding fifteen days in the
 whole, or in parts, at any time during the initial forty days or sixty days out of detention
 period of sixty days or ninety days, as the case may be, as provided in sub-section (3), and
 if he has no jurisdiction to try the case or commit it for trial, and considers further detention
 unnecessary, he may order the accused to be forwarded to a Judicial Magistrate having
 such jurisdiction.
 (3) The Magistrate may authorise the detention of the accused person, beyond the
 period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no
 Magistrate shall authorise the detention of the accused person in custody under this
 sub-section for a total period exceeding—
 When officer
 in charge of
 police station
 may require
 another to
 issue search
warrant.
 Procedure
 when
 investigation
 cannot be
 completed in
 twenty-four
 hours.
60
 (i) ninety days, where the investigation relates to an offence punishable with
 death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years;
 (ii) sixty days, where the investigation relates to any other offence,
 and, on the expiry of the said period of ninety days, or sixty days, as the case may be, the
 accused person shall be released on bail if he is prepared to and does furnish bail, and every
 person released on bail under this sub-section shall be deemed to be so released under the
 provisions of Chapter XXXIV for the purposes of that Chapter.
 (4) No Magistrate shall authorise detention of the accused in custody of the police
 under this section unless the accused is produced before him in person for the first time and
 subsequently every time till the accused remains in the custody of the police, but the
 Magistrate may extend further detention in judicial custody on production of the accused
 either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage.
 (5) No Magistrate of the second class, not specially empowered in this behalf by the
 High Court, shall authorise detention in the custody of the police.
 Explanation I.—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that,
 notwithstanding the expiry of the period specified in sub-section (3), the accused shall be
 detained in custody so long as he does not furnish bail.
 Explanation II.—If any question arises whether an accused person was produced
 before the Magistrate as required under sub-section (4), the production of the accused
 person may be proved by his signature on the order authorising detention or by the order
 certified by the Magistrate as to production of the accused person through the medium of
 electronic video linkage, as the case may be:
 Provided that in case of a woman under eighteen years of age, the detention shall be
 authorised to be in the custody of a remand home or recognised social institution:
 Provided further that no person shall be detained otherwise than in police station
 under policy custody or in prison under Judicial custody or place declared as prison by the
 Central Government or the State Government.
 (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) to sub-section (5), the
 officer in charge of the police station or the police officer making the investigation, if he is
 not below the rank of a sub-inspector, may, where a Judicial Magistrate is not available,
 transmit to the nearest Executive Magistrate, on whom the powers of a Judicial Magistrate
 have been conferred, a copy of the entry in the diary hereinafter specified relating to the
 case, and shall, at the same time, forward the accused to such Executive Magistrate, and
 thereupon such Executive Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, authorise
 the detention of the accused person in such custody as he may think fit for a term not
 exceeding seven days in the aggregate; and, on the expiry of the period of detention so
 authorised, the accused person shall be released on bail except where an order for further
 detention of the accused person has been made by a Magistrate competent to make such
 order; and, where an order for such further detention is made, the period during which the
 accused person was detained in custody under the orders made by an Executive Magistrate
 under this sub-section, shall be taken into account in computing the period specified in
 sub-section (3):
 Provided that before the expiry of the period aforesaid, the Executive Magistrate shall
 transmit to the nearest Judicial Magistrate the records of the case together with a copy of
 the entries in the diary relating to the case which was transmitted to him by the officer in
 charge of the police station or the police officer making the investigation, as the case may
 be.
 (7) A Magistrate authorising under this section detention in the custody of the police
 shall record his reasons for so doing.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
61
 (8) Any Magistrate other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate making such order shall
 forward a copy of his order, with his reasons for making it, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (9) If in any case triable by a Magistrate as a summons-case, the investigation is not
 concluded within a period of six months from the date on which the accused was arrested,
 the Magistrate shall make an order stopping further investigation into the offence unless
 the officer making the investigation satisfies the Magistrate that for special reasons and in
 the interests of justice the continuation of the investigation beyond the period of six
 months is necessary.
 (10) Where any order stopping further investigation into an offence has been made
 under sub-section (9), the Sessions Judge may, if he is satisfied, on an application made to
 him or otherwise, that further investigation into the offence ought to be made, vacate the
 order made under sub-section (9) and direct further investigation to be made into the
 offence subject to such directions with regard to bail and other matters as he may specify.
 188. When any subordinate police officer has made any investigation under this
 Chapter, he shall report the result of such investigation to the officer in charge of the police
 station.
 189.  If, upon an investigation under this Chapter, it appears to the officer in charge of
 the police station that there is not sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion to
 justify the forwarding of the accused to a Magistrate, such officer shall, if such person is in
 custody, release him on his executing a bond, with or without sureties, as such officer may
 direct, to appear, if and when so required, before a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance
 of the offence on a police report, and to try the accused or commit him for trial.
 190. (1) If, upon an investigation under this Chapter, it appears to the officer in charge
 of the police station that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground as aforesaid,
 such officer shall forward the accused under custody to a Judicial Magistrate empowered
 to take cognizance of the offence upon a police report to try the accused or commit him for
 trial, or, if the offence is bailable and the accused is able to give security, shall take security
 from him for his appearance before such Magistrate on a day fixed and for his attendance
 from day to day before such Magistrate until otherwise directed:
 Provided that if the accused is not in custody, the police officer shall take security
 from such person for his appearance before the Judicial Magistrate and the Judicial
 Magistrate to whom such report is forwarded shall not refuse to accept the same on the
 ground that the accused is not taken in custody.
 (2) When the officer in charge of a police station forwards an accused person to a
 Judicial Magistrate or takes security for his appearance before such Magistrate under this
 section, he shall send to such Magistrate any weapon or other article which it may be
 necessary to produce before him, and shall require the complainant (if any) and so many of
 the persons who appear to such officer to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances
 of the case as he may think necessary, to execute a bond to appear before the Judicial
 Magistrate as thereby directed and prosecute or give evidence (as the case may be) in the
 matter of the charge against the accused.
 (3) If the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate is mentioned in the bond, such Court
 shall be held to include any Court to which such Magistrate may refer the case for inquiry
 or trial, provided reasonable notice of such reference is given to such complainant or
 persons.
 (4) The officer in whose presence the bond is executed shall deliver a copy thereof to
 one of the persons who executed it, and shall then send to the Magistrate the original with
 his report.
 Report of
 investigation
 by subordinate
 police officer.
 Release of
 accused when
 evidence
 deficient.
 Cases to be
 sent to
 Magistrate,
 when evidence
 is sufficient.
62
 Complainant
 and witnesses
 not to be
 required to
 accompany
 police officer
 and not to be
 subjected to
 restraint.
 Diary of
 proceedings in
 investigation.
 Report of
 police officer
 on completion
 of
 investigation.
 191. No complainant or witness on his way to any Court shall be required to accompany
 a police officer, or shall be subjected to unnecessary restraint or inconvenience, or required
 to give any security for his appearance other than his own bond:
 Provided that if any complainant or witness refuses to attend or to execute a bond as
 directed in section 190, the officer in charge of the police station may forward him in
 custody to the Magistrate, who may detain him in custody until he executes such bond, or
 until the hearing of the case is completed.
 192. (1) Every police officer making an investigation under this Chapter shall day by
 day enter his proceedings in the investigation in a diary, setting forth the time at which the
 information reached him, the time at which he began and closed his investigation, the place
 or places visited by him, and a statement of the circumstances ascertained through his
 investigation.
 (2) The statements of witnesses recorded during the course of investigation under
 section 180 shall be inserted in the case diary.
 (3) The diary referred to in sub-section (1) shall be a volume and duly paginated.
 (4) Any Criminal Court may send for the police diaries of a case under inquiry or trial
 in such Court, and may use such diaries, not as evidence in the case, but to aid it in such
 inquiry or trial.
 (5) Neither the accused nor his agents shall be entitled to call for such diaries, nor
 shall he or they be entitled to see them merely because they are referred to by the Court; but,
 if they are used by the police officer who made them to refresh his memory, or if the Court
 uses them for the purpose of contradicting such police officer, the provisions of section 148
 or section 164, as the case may be, of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, shall apply.
 193. (1) Every investigation under this Chapter shall be completed without
 unnecessary delay.
 (2) The investigation in relation to an offence under sections 64, 66, 67, 68, 70, 71 of
 the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or under sections 4, 6, 8 or section 10 of the Protection of
 Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 shall be completed within two months from the
 date on which the information was recorded by the officer in charge of the police station.
 (3) (i) As soon as the investigation is completed, the officer in charge of the police
 station shall forward to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a
 police report, a report in the form as the State Government may, by rules provide, stating—
 (a) the names of the parties;
 (b) the nature of the information;
 (c) the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted with the circumstances
 of the case;
 (d) whether any offence appears to have been committed and, if so, by whom;
 (e) whether the accused has been arrested;
 (f) whether the accused has been released on his bond and, if so, whether with
 or without sureties;
 (g) whether the accused has been forwarded in custody under section 190;
 (h) whether the report of medical examination of the woman has been attached
 where investigation relates to an offence under sections 64, 66, 67, 68 or section 70 of
 the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 32 of 2012.
 30
 35
 40
63
 (ii) The police officer shall, within a period of ninety days, inform the progress of the
 investigation by any means including electronic communication to the informant or the
 victim.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (iii) The officer shall also communicate, in such manner as the State Government may,
 by rules, provide, the action taken by him, to the person, if any, by whom the information
 relating to the commission of the offence was first given.
 (4) Where a superior officer of police has been appointed under section 177, the
 report shall, in any case in which the State Government by general or special order so
 directs, be submitted through that officer, and he may, pending the orders of the Magistrate,
 direct the officer in charge of the police station to make further investigation.
 (5) Whenever it appears from a report forwarded under this section that the accused
 has been released on his bond, the Magistrate shall make such order for the discharge of
 such bond or otherwise as he thinks fit.
 (6) When such report is in respect of a case to which section 190 applies, the police
 officer shall forward to the Magistrate along with the report—
 (a) all documents or relevant extracts thereof on which the prosecution proposes
 to rely other than those already sent to the Magistrate during investigation;
 (b) the statements recorded under section 180 of all the persons whom the
 prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses.
 (7) If the police officer is of opinion that any part of any such statement is not relevant
 to the subject-matter of the proceedings or that its disclosure to the accused is not essential
 in the interests of justice and is inexpedient in the public interest, he shall indicate that part
 of the statement and append a note requesting the Magistrate to exclude that part from the
 copies to be granted to the accused and stating his reasons for making such request.
 (8) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (7), the police officer
 investigating the case shall also submit such number of copies of the police report along
 with other documents duly indexed to the Judicial Magistrate for supply to the accused as
 required under section 230:
 Provided that supply of report and other documents by electronic communication
 shall be considered as duly served.
 (9) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further investigation in respect
 of an offence after a report under sub-section (3) has been forwarded to the Magistrate and,
 where upon such investigation, the officer in charge of the police station obtains further
 evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward to the Magistrate a further report or reports
 regarding such evidence in the form as the State Government may, by rules, provide; and
 the provisions of sub-sections (3) to (7) shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such
 report or reports as they apply in relation to a report forwarded under sub-section (3):
 Provided that further investigation during the trial may be permitted with the
 permission of the Court trying the case and the same shall be completed within a period of
 ninety days which may extend with the permission of the Court.
 194. (1) When the officer in charge of a police station or some other police officer
 specially empowered by the State Government in that behalf receives information that a
 person has committed suicide, or has been killed by another or by an animal or by machinery
 or by an accident, or has died under circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that
 some other person has committed an offence, he shall immediately give intimation thereof
 to the nearest Executive Magistrate empowered to hold inquests, and, unless otherwise
 directed by any rule made by the State Government, or by any general or special order of the
 District or Sub-divisional Magistrate, shall proceed to the place where the body of such
 deceased person is, and there, in the presence of two or more respectable inhabitants of the
 Police to
 enquire and
 report on
 suicide, etc.
64
 neighbourhood, shall make an investigation, and draw up a report of the apparent cause of
 death, describing such wounds, fractures, bruises, and other marks of injury as may be
 found on the body, and stating in what manner, or by what weapon or instrument
 (if any); such marks appear to have been inflicted.
 (2) The report shall be signed by such police officer and other persons, or by so many
 of them as concur therein, and shall be forwarded to the District Magistrate or the
 Sub-divisional Magistrate within twenty-four hours.
 (3) When—
 (i) the case involves suicide by a woman within seven years of her marriage; or
 (ii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage
 in any circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that some other person committed
 an offence in relation to such woman; or
 (iii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage
 and any relative of the woman has made a request in this behalf; or
 (iv) there is any doubt regarding the cause of death; or
 (v) the police officer for any other reason considers it expedient so to do,
 he shall, subject to such rules as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf, forward
 the body, with a view to its being examined, to the nearest Civil Surgeon, or other qualified
 medical person appointed in this behalf by the State Government, if the state of the weather
 and the distance admit of its being so forwarded without risk of such putrefaction on the
 road as would render such examination useless.
 (4) The following Magistrates are empowered to hold inquests, namely, any District
 Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate and any other Executive Magistrate specially
 empowered in this behalf by the State Government or the District Magistrate.
 Power to
 summon
 persons.
 Inquiry by
 Magistrate
 into cause of
 death.
 195. (1) A police officer proceeding under section 194 may, by order in writing, summon
 two or more persons as aforesaid for the purpose of the said investigation, and any other
 person who appears to be acquainted with the facts of the case and every person so
 summoned shall be bound to attend and to answer truly all questions other than questions
 the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a
 penalty or forfeiture:
 Provided that no male person under the age of fifteen years or above the age of sixty
 years or a woman or a mentally or physically disabled person or a person with acute illness
 shall be required to attend at any place other than the place where such person resides,
 unless such person is willing to attend and answer at the police station or at any other place
 within the limits of such police station.
 (2) If the facts do not disclose a cognizable offence to which section 190 applies, such
 persons shall not be required by the police officer to attend a Magistrate's Court.
 196. (1) When the case is of the nature referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) of
 sub-section (3) of section 194, the nearest Judicial Magistrate empowered to hold inquests
 shall, and in any other case mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 194, any Magistrate so
 empowered may hold an inquiry into the cause of death either instead of, or in addition to,
 the investigation held by the police officer; and if he does so, he shall have all the powers
 in conducting it which he would have in holding an inquiry into an offence.
 (2) Where,—
 (a) any person dies or disappears, or
 (b) rape is alleged to have been committed on any woman,
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 while such person or woman is in the custody of the police or in any other custody authorised
65
 by the Magistrate or the Court, under this Sanhita in addition to the inquiry or investigation
 held by the police, an inquiry shall be held by the Judicial Magistrate within whose local
 jurisdiction the offence has been committed.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (3) The Magistrate holding such an inquiry shall record the evidence taken by him in
 connection therewith in any manner hereinafter specified according to the circumstances of
 the case.
 (4) Whenever such Magistrate considers it expedient to make an examination of the
 dead body of any person who has been already interred, in order to discover the cause of
 his death, the Magistrate may cause the body to be disinterred and examined.
 (5) Where an inquiry is to be held under this section, the Magistrate shall, wherever
 practicable, inform the relatives of the deceased whose names and addresses are known,
 and shall allow them to remain present at the inquiry.
 (6) The Judicial Magistrate or the Executive Magistrate or the police officer holding
 an inquiry or investigation under sub-section (2) shall, within twenty-four hours of the
 death of a person, forward the body with a view to its being examined to the nearest Civil
 Surgeon or other qualified medical person appointed in this behalf by the State Government,
 unless it is not possible to do so for reasons to be recorded in writing.
 Explanation.—In this section, the expression "relative" means parents, children,
 brothers, sisters and spouse.
 CHAPTER XIV
 JURISDICTION OF THE CRIMINAL COURTS IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS
 197.  Every offence shall ordinarily be inquired into and tried by a Court within whose
 local jurisdiction it was committed.
 198. (a) When it is uncertain in which of several local areas an offence was
 committed; or
 (b) where an offence is committed partly in one local area and partly in another; or
 (c) where an offence is a continuing one, and continues to be committed in more local
 areas than one; or
 (d) where it consists of several acts done in different local areas,
 it may be inquired into or tried by a Court having jurisdiction over any of such local areas.
 199. When an act is an offence by reason of anything which has been done and of a
 consequence which has ensued, the offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within
 whose local jurisdiction such thing has been done or such consequence has ensued.
 200. When an act is an offence by reason of its relation to any other act which is also
 an offence or which would be an offence if the doer were capable of committing an offence,
 the first-mentioned offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local
 jurisdiction either act was done.
 201. (1) Any offence of dacoity, or of dacoity with murder, of belonging to a gang of
 dacoits, or of escaping from custody, may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose
 local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the accused person is found.
 (2) Any offence of kidnapping or abduction of a person may be inquired into or tried
 by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the person was kidnapped or abducted or was
 conveyed or concealed or detained.
 (3) Any offence of theft, extortion or robbery may be inquired into or tried by a Court
 within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the stolen property which is
 Ordinary place
 of inquiry and
 trial.
 Place of
 inquiry or
 trial.
 Offence
 triable where
 act is done or
 consequence
 ensues.
 Place of trial
 where act is an
 offence by
 reason of
 relation to
 other offence.
 Place of trial
 in case of
 certain
 offences.
66
 the subject of the offence was possessed by any person committing it or by any person
 who received or retained such property knowing or having reason to believe it to be stolen
 property.
 (4) Any offence of criminal misappropriation or of criminal breach of trust may be
 inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed
 or any part of the property which is the subject of the offence was received or retained, or
 was required to be returned or accounted for, by the accused person.
 (5) Any offence which includes the possession of stolen property may be inquired
 into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the
 stolen property was possessed by any person who received or retained it knowing or
 having reason to believe it to be stolen property.
 Offences
 committed by
 means of
 electronic
 communications,
 letters, etc.
 Offence
 committed on
 journey or
 voyage.
 Place of trial
 for offences
 triable
 together.
 Power to
 order cases to
 be tried in
 different
 sessions
 divisions.
 High Court to
 decide, in case
 of doubt,
 district where
 inquiry or trial
 shall take
 place.
 202. (1) Any offence which includes cheating may, if the deception is practised by
 means of electronic communications or letters or telecommunication messages, be inquired
 into or tried by any Court within whose local jurisdiction such electronic communications
 or letters or messages were sent or were received; and any offence of cheating and
 dishonestly inducing delivery of property may be inquired into or tried by a Court within
 whose local jurisdiction the property was delivered by the person deceived or was received
 by the accused person.
 (2) Any offence punishable under section 81 of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 may
 be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed
 or the offender last resided with his or her spouse by the first marriage, or the wife by the
 first marriage has taken up permanent residence after the commission of the offence.
 203. When an offence is committed whilst the person by or against whom, or the
 thing in respect of which, the offence is committed is in the course of performing a journey
 or voyage, the offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court through or into whose local
 jurisdiction that person or thing passed in the course of that journey or voyage.
 204. Where—
 (a) the offences committed by any person are such that he may be charged
 with, and tried at one trial for, each such offence by virtue of the provisions of
 section 242, section 243 or section 244, or
 (b) the offence or offences committed by several persons are such that they
 may be charged with and tried together by virtue of the provisions of section 246,
 the offences may be inquired into or tried by any Court competent to inquire into or try any
 of the offences.
 205. Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding provisions of this Chapter,
 the State Government may direct that any cases or class of cases committed for trial in any
 district may be tried in any sessions division:
 Provided that such direction is not repugnant to any direction previously issued by
 the High Court or the Supreme Court under the Constitution, or under this Sanhita or any
 other law for the time being in force.
 206. Where two or more Courts have taken cognizance of the same offence and a
 question arises as to which of them ought to inquire into or try that offence, the question
 shall be decided—
 (a) if the Courts are subordinate to the same High Court, by that High Court;
 (b) if the Courts are not subordinate to the same High Court, by the High Court
 within the local limits of whose appellate criminal jurisdiction the proceedings were
 first commenced,
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 and thereupon all other proceedings in respect of that offence shall be discontinued.
67
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 207. (1) When a Magistrate of the first class sees reason to believe that any person
 within his local jurisdiction has committed outside such jurisdiction (whether within or
 outside India) an offence which cannot, under the provisions of sections 197 to 205 (both
 inclusive), or any other law for the time being in force, be inquired into or tried within such
 jurisdiction but is under some law for the time being in force triable in India, such Magistrate
 may inquire into the offence as if it had been committed within such local jurisdiction and
 compel such person in the manner hereinbefore provided to appear before him, and send
 such person to the Magistrate having jurisdiction to inquire into or try such offence, or, if
 such offence is not punishable with death or imprisonment for life and such person is ready
 and willing to give bail to the satisfaction of the Magistrate acting under this section, take
 a bond with or without sureties for his appearance before the Magistrate having such
 jurisdiction.
 (2) When there are more Magistrates than one having such jurisdiction and the
 Magistrate acting under this section cannot satisfy himself as to the Magistrate to or before
 whom such person should be sent or bound to appear, the case shall be reported for the
 orders of the High Court.
 208. When an offence is committed outside India—
 (a) by a citizen of India, whether on the high seas or elsewhere; or
 (b) by a person, not being such citizen, on any ship or aircraft registered in
 India,
 he may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had been committed at any place
 within India at which he may be found or where the offence is registered in India:
 Provided that notwithstanding anything in any of the preceding sections of this
 Chapter, no such offence shall be inquired into or tried in India except with the previous
 sanction of the Central Government.
 209. When any offence alleged to have been committed in a territory outside India is
 being inquired into or tried under the provisions of section 208, the Central Government
 may, if it thinks fit, direct that copies of depositions made or exhibits produced, either in
 physical form or in electronic form, before a Judicial officer, in or for that territory or before
 a diplomatic or consular representative of India in or for that territory shall be received as
 evidence by the Court holding such inquiry or trial in any case in which such Court might
 issue a commission for taking evidence as to the matters to which such depositions or
 exhibits relate.
 CHAPTER XV
 CONDITIONS REQUISITE FOR INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS
 210. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of the first class,
 and any Judicial Magistrate of the second class specially empowered in this behalf under
 sub-section (2), may take cognizance of any offence—
 (a) upon receiving a complaint of facts, including any complaint filed by a
 person authorised under any special law, which constitutes such offence;
 (b) upon a police report (recorded in any mode including digital mode) of such
 facts;
 (c) upon information received from any person other than a police officer, or
 upon his own knowledge, that such offence has been committed.
 (2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any Magistrate of the second class to
 take cognizance under sub-section (1) of such offences as are within his competence to
 inquire into or try.
 Power to issue
 summons or
 warrant for
 offence
 committed
 beyond local
 jurisdiction.
 Offence
 committed
 outside India.
 Receipt of
 evidence
 relating to
 offences
 committed
 outside India.
 Cognizance of
 offences by
 Magistrates