 (3) Any Magistrate empowered under this section, shall upon receiving a complaint
 against a public servant arising in course of the discharge of his official duties, take
 cognizance, subject to—
 (a) receiving a report containing facts and circumstances of the incident from
 the officer superior to such public servant; and
 (b) after consideration of the assertions made by the public servant as to the
 situation that led to the incident so alleged.
 Transfer on
 application of
 accused.
 Making over
 of cases to
 Magistrates.
 Cognizance of
 offences by
 Courts of
 Session.
 Additional
 Sessions Judges
 to try cases
 made over to
 them.
 Prosecution
 for contempt
 of lawful
 authority of
 public
 servants, for
 offences
 against public
 justice and for
 offences
 relating to
 documents
 given in
 evidence.
 211. When a Magistrate takes cognizance of an offence under clause (c) of
 sub-section (1) of section 210, the accused shall, before any evidence is taken, be informed
 that he is entitled to have the case inquired into or tried by another Magistrate, and if the
 accused or any of the accused, if there be more than one, objects to further proceedings
 before the Magistrate taking cognizance, the case shall be transferred to such other Magistrate
 as may be specified by the Chief Judicial Magistrate in this behalf.
 212. (1) Any Chief Judicial Magistrate may, after taking cognizance of an offence,
 make over the case for inquiry or trial to any competent Magistrate subordinate to him.
 (2) Any Judicial Magistrate of the first class empowered in this behalf by the Chief
 Judicial Magistrate may, after taking cognizance of an offence, make over the case for
 inquiry or trial to such other competent Judicial Magistrate as the Chief Judicial Magistrate
 may, by general or special order, specify, and thereupon such Magistrate may hold the
 inquiry or trial.
 213.  Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Sanhita or by any other law for
 the time being in force, no Court of Session shall take cognizance of any offence as a Court
 of original jurisdiction unless the case has been committed to it by a Magistrate under this
 Sanhita.
 214.  An Additional Sessions Judge shall try such cases as the Sessions Judge of the
 division may, by general or special order, make over to him for trial or as the High Court may,
 by special order, direct him to try.
 215. (1) No Court shall take cognizance—
 (a) (i) of any offence punishable under sections 204 to 224 (both inclusive but
 excluding section 207) of the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, or
 (ii) of any abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence, or
 (iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit such offence,
 except on the complaint in writing of the public servant concerned or of some other public
 servant to whom he is administratively subordinate or of some other public servant who is
 authorised by the concerned public servant so to do;
 (b) (i) of any offence punishable under any of the following sections of the
 Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, namely, sections 227 to 231 (both inclusive), 234, 235,
 240 to 246 (both inclusive) and 265, when such offence is alleged to have been
 committed in, or in relation to, any proceeding in any Court; or
 (ii) of any offence described in section 334, or punishable under section 337,
 section 340 or section 341 of the said Sanhita, when such offence is alleged to have
 been committed in respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding
 in any Court; or
 (iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, or the abetment
 of, any offence specified in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii),
 except on the complaint in writing of that Court or by such officer of the Court as that Court
 may authorise in writing in this behalf, or of some other Court to which that Court is
 subordinate.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
69
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 (2) Where a complaint has been made by a public servant or by some other public
 servant who has been authorised to do so by him under clause (a) of sub-section (1), any
 authority to which he is administratively subordinate or who has authorised such public
 servant may order the withdrawal of the complaint and send a copy of such order to the
 Court; and upon its receipt by the Court, no further proceedings shall be taken on the
 complaint:
 Provided that no such withdrawal shall be ordered if the trial in the Court of first
 instance has been concluded.
 (3) In clause (b) of sub-section (1), the term "Court" means a Civil, Revenue or
 Criminal Court, and includes a tribunal constituted by or under a Central, Provincial or State
 Act if declared by that Act to be a Court for the purposes of this section.
 (4) For the purposes of clause (b) of sub-section (1), a Court shall be deemed to be
 subordinate to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the appealable decrees or
 sentences of such former Court, or in the case of a Civil Court from whose decrees no appeal
 ordinarily lies, to the Principal Court having ordinary original civil jurisdiction within whose
 local jurisdiction such Civil Court is situate:
 Provided that—
 (a) where appeals lie to more than one Court, the Appellate Court of inferior
 jurisdiction shall be the Court to which such Court shall be deemed to be subordinate;
 (b) where appeals lie to a Civil and also to a Revenue Court, such Court shall be
 deemed to be subordinate to the Civil or Revenue Court according to the nature of the
 case or proceeding in connection with which the offence is alleged to have been
 committed.
 216.  A witness or any other person may file a complaint in relation to an offence
 under section 230 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 217. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of—
 (a) any offence punishable under Chapter VI or under section 194, section 297
 or sub-section (1) of section 351 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; or
 (b) a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence; or
 (c) any such abetment, as is described in section 47 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
 Sanhita, 2023,
 except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of the State Government.
 (2) No Court shall take cognizance of—
 (a) any offence punishable under section 195 or sub-section (2) or
 sub-section (3) of section 351 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; or
 (b) a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence,
 except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of the State
 Government or of the District Magistrate.
 (3) No Court shall take cognizance of the offence of any criminal conspiracy punishable
 under section 61 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, other than a criminal conspiracy to
 commit an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment
 for a term of two years or upwards, unless the State Government or the District Magistrate
 has consented in writing to the initiation of the proceedings:
 Procedure for
 witnesses in
 case of
 threatening,
 etc.
 Prosecution
 for offences
 against the
 State and for
 criminal
 conspiracy to
 commit such
 offence.
70
 Provided that where the criminal conspiracy is one to which the provisions of
 section 215 apply, no such consent shall be necessary.
 (4) The Central Government or the State Government may, before according sanction
 under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) and the District Magistrate may, before according
 sanction under sub-section (2) and the State Government or the District Magistrate may,
 before giving consent under sub-section (3), order a preliminary investigation by a police
 officer not being below the rank of Inspector, in which case such police officer shall have
 the powers referred to in sub-section (3) of section 174.
 Prosecution of
 Judges and
 public
 servants.
 218. (1) When any person who is or was a Judge or Magistrate or a public servant not
 removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the Government is accused of any
 offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the
 discharge of his official duty, no Court shall take cognizance of such offence except with the
 previous sanction save as otherwise provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013—
 (a) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be, was at the
 time of commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of
 the Union, of the Central Government;
 (b) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be, was at the
 time of commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of
 a State, of the State Government:
 Provided that where the alleged offence was committed by a person referred to in
 clause (b) during the period while a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 356 of the
 Constitution was in force in a State, clause (b) will apply as if for the expression "State
 Government" occurring therein, the expression "Central Government" were substituted:
 Provided further that such Government shall take a decision within a period of one
 hundred and twenty days from the date of the receipt of the request for sanction and in case
 it fails to do so, the sanction shall be deemed to have been accorded by such Government:
 Provided also no sanction shall be required in case of a public servant accused of any
 offence alleged to have been committed under section 197, section 198, section 63,
 section 66, section 68, section 70, section 73, section 74, section 75, section 76, section 77,
 section 141, or section 351 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 (2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have been committed by
 any member of the Armed Forces of the Union while acting or purporting to act in the
 discharge of his official duty, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.
 (3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of
 sub-section (2) shall apply to such class or category of the members of the Forces charged
 with the maintenance of public order as may be specified therein, wherever they may be
 serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub-section will apply as if for the expression
 "Central Government" occurring therein, the expression "State Government" were
 substituted.
 (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), no Court shall take
 cognizance of any offence, alleged to have been committed by any member of the Forces
 charged with the maintenance of public order in a State while acting or purporting to act in
 the discharge of his official duty during the period while a Proclamation issued under
 clause (1) of article 356 of the Constitution was in force therein, except with the previous
 sanction of the Central Government.
 (5) The Central Government or the State Government, may determine the person by
 whom, the manner in which, and the offence or offences for which, the prosecution of such
 Judge, Magistrate or public servant is to be conducted, and may specify the Court before
 which the trial is to be held.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 1 of 2014.
71
 219. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter V of
 the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved
 by the offence:
 Provided that—
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (a) where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is having intellectual
 disability requiring higher support needs or a person with mental illness, or is from
 sickness or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the
 local customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in public, some other
 person may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his or her behalf;
 (b) where such person is the husband and he is serving in any of the Armed
 Forces of the Union under conditions which are certified by his Commanding Officer
 as precluding him from obtaining leave of absence to enable him to make a complaint
 in person, some other person authorised by the husband in accordance with the
 provisions of sub-section (4) may make a complaint on his behalf;
 (c) where the person aggrieved by an offence punishable under section 81 of
 the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is the wife, complaint may be made on her behalf
 by her father, mother, brother, sister, son or daughter or by her father's or mother's
 brother or sister, or, with the leave of the Court, by any other person related to her by
 blood, marriage or adoption.
 (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), no person other than the husband of the
 woman shall be deemed to be aggrieved by any offence punishable under section 83 of the
 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023:
 Provided that in the absence of the husband, some person who had care of the
 woman on his behalf at the time when such offence was committed may, with the leave of
 the Court, make a complaint on his behalf.
 (3) When in any case falling under clause (a) of the proviso to sub-section (1), the
 complaint is sought to be made on behalf of a person under the age of eighteen years or of
 a person with mental illness by a person who has not been appointed or declared by a
 competent authority to be the guardian of the person of the minor or a person with mental
 illness, and the Court is satisfied that there is a guardian so appointed or declared, the Court
 shall, before granting the application for leave, cause notice to be given to such guardian
 and give him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
 (4) The authorisation referred to in clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1), shall
 be in writing, shall be signed or otherwise attested by the husband, shall contain a statement
 to the effect that he has been informed of the allegations upon which the complaint is to be
 founded, shall be countersigned by his Commanding Officer, and shall be accompanied by
 a certificate signed by that Officer to the effect that leave of absence for the purpose of
 making a complaint in person cannot for the time being be granted to the husband.
 (5) Any document purporting to be such an authorisation and complying with the
 provisions of sub-section (4), and any document purporting to be a certificate required by
 that sub-section shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to be genuine and shall
 be received in evidence.
 (6) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under section 64 of the Bharatiya
 Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, where such offence consists of sexual intercourse by a man with his
 own wife, the wife being under eighteen years of age, if more than one year has elapsed from
 the date of the commission of the offence.
 Prosecution
 for offences
 against
 marriage.
72
 (7) The provisions of this section apply to the abetment of, or attempt to commit, an
 offence as they apply to the offence.
 Prosecution of
 offences under
 section 84 of
 Bharatiya
 Nyaya
 Sanhita, 2023.
 Cognizance of
 offence.
 Prosecution
 for
 defamation.
 220. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 84 of the
 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 except upon a police report of facts which constitute such
 offence or upon a complaint made by the person aggrieved by the offence or by her father,
 mother, brother, sister or by her father's or mother's brother or sister or, with the leave of the
 Court, by any other person related to her by blood, marriage or adoption.
 221. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 67 of the
 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 where the persons are in a marital relationship, except upon
 prima facie satisfaction of the facts which constitute the offence upon a complaint having
 been filed or made by the wife against the husband.
 222. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XIX
 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 except upon a complaint made by some person
 aggrieved by the offence:
 Provided that where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is having
 intellectual disability requiring higher support needs or a person with mental illness, or is
 from sickness or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the
 local customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in public, some other
 person may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his or her behalf.
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Sanhita, when any offence falling
 under Chapter XIX of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is alleged to have been committed
 against a person who, at the time of such commission, is the President of India, the
 Vice-President of India, the Governor of a State, the Administrator of a Union territory or a
 Minister of the Union or of a State or of a Union territory, or any other public servant
 employed in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State in respect of his conduct
 in the discharge of his public functions, a Court of Session may take cognizance of such
 offence, without the case being committed to it, upon a complaint in writing made by the
 Public Prosecutor.
 (3) Every complaint referred to in sub-section (2) shall set forth the facts which
 constitute the offence alleged, the nature of such offence and such other particulars as are
 reasonably sufficient to give notice to the accused of the offence alleged to have been
 committed by him.
 (4) No complaint under sub-section (2) shall be made by the Public Prosecutor except
 with the previous sanction—
 (a) of the State Government,—
 (i) in the case of a person who is or has been the Governor of that State or
 a Minister of that Government;
 (ii) in the case of any other public servant employed in connection with
 the affairs of the State;
 (b) of the Central Government, in any other case.
 (5) No Court of Session shall take cognizance of an offence under sub-section (2)
 unless the complaint is made within six months from the date on which the offence is alleged
 to have been committed.
 (6) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of the person against whom the
 offence is alleged to have been committed, to make a complaint in respect of that offence
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
73
 before a Magistrate having jurisdiction or the power of such Magistrate to take cognizance
 of the offence upon such complaint.
 CHAPTER XVI
 COMPLAINTS TO MAGISTRATES
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 223. A Magistrate having jurisdiction while taking cognizance of an offence on
 complaint shall examine upon oath the complainant and the witnesses present, if any, and
 the substance of such examination shall be reduced to writing and shall be signed by the
 complainant and the witnesses, and also by the Magistrate:
 Provided that no cognizance of an offence under this section shall be taken by the
 Magistrate without giving the accused an opportunity of being heard:
 Provided further that, when the complaint is made in writing, the Magistrate need not
 examine the complainant and the witnesses—
 (a) if a public servant acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official
 duties or a Court has made the complaint; or
 (b) if the Magistrate makes over the case for inquiry or trial to another Magistrate
 under section 212:
 Provided further that if the Magistrate makes over the case to another Magistrate
 under section 212 after examining the complainant and the witnesses, the latter Magistrate
 need not re-examine them:
 Provided further that in case of a complaint against a public servant, the Magistrate
 shall comply with the procedure provided in section 217.
 224. If the complaint is made to a Magistrate who is not competent to take cognizance
 of the offence, he shall,—
 (a) if the complaint is in writing, return it for presentation to the proper Court
 with an endorsement to that effect;
 (b) if the complaint is not in writing, direct the complainant to the proper Court.
 225. (1) Any Magistrate, on receipt of a complaint of an offence of which he is
 authorised to take cognizance or which has been made over to him under section 212, may,
 if he thinks fit, and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area
 in which he exercises his jurisdiction, postpone the issue of process against the accused,
 and either inquire into the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by a police
 officer or by such other person as he thinks fit, for the purpose of deciding whether or not
 there is sufficient ground for proceeding:
 Provided that no such direction for investigation shall be made,—
 (a) where it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable
 exclusively by the Court of Session; or
 (b) where the complaint has not been made by a Court, unless the complainant
 and the witnesses present (if any) have been examined on oath under section 223.
 (2) In an inquiry under sub-section (1), the Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, take
 evidence of witnesses on oath:
 Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable
 exclusively by the Court of Session, he shall call upon the complainant to produce all his
 witnesses and examine them on oath.
 (3) If an investigation under sub-section (1) is made by a person not being a police
 officer, he shall have for that investigation all the powers conferred by this Sanhita on an
 officer in-charge of a police station except the power to arrest without warrant.
 Examination
 of complainant.
 Procedure by
 Magistrate not
 competent to
 take
 cognizance of
 case.
 Postponement
 of issue of
 process.
74
 Dismissal of
 complaint.
 Issue of
 process.
 Magistrate
 may dispense
 with personal
 attendance of
 accused.
 Special
 summons in
 cases of petty
 offence.
 226.  If, after considering the statements on oath (if any) of the complainant and of the
 witnesses and the result of the inquiry or investigation (if any) under section 225, the
 Magistrate is of opinion that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding, he shall dismiss
 the complaint, and in every such case he shall briefly record his reasons for so doing.
 CHAPTER XVIII
 COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE MAGISTRATES
 227. (1) If in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence there is
 sufficient ground for proceeding, and the case appears to be—
 (a) a summons-case, he shall issue summons to the accused for his attendance;
 or
 (b) a warrant-case, he may issue a warrant, or, if he thinks fit, a summons, for
 causing the accused to be brought or to appear at a certain time before such Magistrate
 or (if he has no jurisdiction himself) some other Magistrate having jurisdiction.
 (2) No summons or warrant shall be issued against the accused under sub-section (1)
 until a list of the prosecution witnesses has been filed.
 (3) In a proceeding instituted upon a complaint made in writing, every summons or
 warrant issued under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a copy of such complaint:
 Provided that summons or warrants may also be issued through electronic means.
 (4) When by any law for the time being in force any process-fees or other fees are
 payable, no process shall be issued until the fees are paid and, if such fees are not paid
 within a reasonable time, the Magistrate may dismiss the complaint.
 (5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the provisions of section 90.
 228. (1) Whenever a Magistrate issues a summons, he may, if he sees reason so to do,
 dispense with the personal attendance of the accused and permit him to appear by his
 pleader.
 (2) But the Magistrate inquiring into or trying the case may, in his discretion, at any
 stage of the proceedings, direct the personal attendance of the accused, and, if necessary,
 enforce such attendance in the manner hereinbefore provided.
 229. (1) If, in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance of a petty offence, the
 case may be summarily disposed of under sections 283, 284 or section 285, the Magistrate
 shall, except where he is, for reasons to be recorded in writing of a contrary opinion, issue
 summons to the accused requiring him either to appear in person or by pleader before the
 Magistrate on a specified date, or if he desires to plead guilty to the charge without appearing
 before the Magistrate, to transmit before the specified date, by post or by messenger to the
 Magistrate, the said plea in writing and the amount of fine specified in the summons or if he
 desires to appear by pleader and to plead guilty to the charge through such pleader, to
 authorise, in writing, the pleader to plead guilty to the charge on his behalf and to pay the
 fine through such pleader:
 Provided that the amount of the fine specified in such summons shall not exceed five
 thousand rupees.
 (2) For the purposes of this section, "petty offence" means any offence punishable
 only with fine not exceeding five thousand rupees, but does not include any offence so
 punishable under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, or under any other law which provides for
 convicting the accused person in his absence on a plea of guilty.
 (3) The State Government may, by notification, specially empower any Magistrate to
 exercise the powers conferred by sub-section (1) in relation to any offence which is
 compoundable under section 359 or any offence punishable with imprisonment for a term
 not exceeding three months, or with fine, or with both where the Magistrate is of opinion
 that, having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, the imposition of fine only
 would meet the ends of justice.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 59 of 1988.
75
 230. In any case where the proceeding has been instituted on a police report, the
 Magistrate shall without delay, and in no case beyond fourteen days from the date of
 production or appearance of the accused, furnish to the accused and the victim (if represented
 by an advocate) free of cost, a copy of each of the following:—
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 (i) the police report;
 (ii) the first information report recorded under section 193;
 (iii) the statements recorded under sub-section (3) of section 180 of all persons
 whom the prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses, excluding therefrom any
 part in regard to which a request for such exclusion has been made by the police
 officer under sub-section (6) of section 193;
 (iv) the confessions and statements, if any, recorded under section 183;
 (v) any other document or relevant extract thereof forwarded to the Magistrate
 with the police report under sub-section (5) of section 193:
 Provided that the Magistrate may, after perusing any such part of a statement as is
 referred to in clause (iii) and considering the reasons given by the police officer for the
 request, direct that a copy of that part of the statement or of such portion thereof as the
 Magistrate thinks proper, shall be furnished to the accused:
 Provided further that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any such document is
 voluminous, he shall, instead of furnishing the accused and the victim (if represented by an
 advocate) with a copy thereof, may furnish the copies through electronic means or direct
 that he will only be allowed to inspect it either personally or through advocate in Court:
 Provided also that supply of documents in electronic form shall be considered as duly
 furnished.
 231. Where, in a case instituted otherwise than on a police report, it appears to the
 Magistrate issuing process under section 227 that the offence is triable exclusively by the
 Court of Session, the Magistrate shall forthwith furnish to the accused, free of cost, a copy
 of each of the following:—
 (i) the statements recorded under section 223 or section 225, of all persons
 examined by the Magistrate;
 (ii) the statements and confessions, if any, recorded under section 180 or
 section 183;
 (iii) any documents produced before the Magistrate on which the prosecution
 proposes to rely:
 Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any such document is voluminous, he
 shall, instead of furnishing the accused with a copy thereof, direct that he will only be
 allowed to inspect it either personally or through pleader in Court:
 Provided further that supply of documents in electronic form shall be considered as
 duly furnished.
 232. When in a case instituted on a police report or otherwise, the accused appears or
 is brought before the Magistrate and it appears to the Magistrate that the offence is triable
 exclusively by the Court of Session, he shall—
 (a) commit, after complying with the provisions of section 230 or section 231
 the case to the Court of Session, and subject to the provisions of this Sanhita relating
 to bail, remand the accused to custody until such commitment has been made;
 (b) subject to the provisions of this Sanhita relating to bail, remand the accused
 to custody during, and until the conclusion of, the trial;
 (c) send to that Court the record of the case and the documents and articles, if
 any, which are to be produced in evidence;
 Supply to
 accused of
 copy of police
 report and
 other
 documents.
 Supply of
 copies of
 statements
 and documents
 to accused in
 other cases
 triable by
 Court of
 Session.
 Commitment
 of case to Court
 of Session when
 offence is
 triable
 exclusively by
 it.
76
 (d) notify the Public Prosecutor of the commitment of the case to the Court of
 Session:
 Provided that the proceedings under this section shall be completed within a period
 of ninety days from the date of taking cognizance, and such period may be extended by the
 Magistrate for a period not exceeding one hundred and eighty days for the reasons to be
 recorded in writing:
 Provided further that any application filed before the Magistrate by the accused or
 the victim or any person authorised by such person in a case triable by Court of Session,
 shall be forwarded to the Court of Session with the committal of the case.
 Procedure to
 be followed
 when there is
 a complaint
 case and
 police
 investigation
 in respect of
 same offence.
 Contents of
 charge.
 233. (1) When in a case instituted otherwise than on a police report (hereinafter
 referred to as a complaint case), it is made to appear to the Magistrate, during the course of
 the inquiry or trial held by him, that an investigation by the police is in progress in relation
 to the offence which is the subject-matter of the inquiry or trial held by him, the Magistrate
 shall stay the proceedings of such inquiry or trial and call for a report on the matter from the
 police officer conducting the investigation.
 (2) If a report is made by the investigating police officer under section 193 and on
 such report cognizance of any offence is taken by the Magistrate against any person who
 is an accused in the complaint case, the Magistrate shall inquire into or try together the
 complaint case and the case arising out of the police report as if both the cases were
 instituted on a police report.
 (3) If the police report does not relate to any accused in the complaint case or if the
 Magistrate does not take cognizance of any offence on the police report, he shall proceed
 with the inquiry or trial, which was stayed by him, in accordance with the provisions of this
 Sanhita.
 CHAPTER XIX
 THE CHARGE
 A.—Form of charges
 234. (1) Every charge under this Sanhita shall state the offence with which the accused
 is charged.
 (2) If the law which creates the offence gives it any specific name, the offence may be
 described in the charge by that name only.
 (3) If the law which creates the offence does not give it any specific name, so much of
 the definition of the offence must be stated as to give the accused notice of the matter with
 which he is charged.
 (4) The law and section of the law against which the offence is said to have been
 committed shall be mentioned in the charge.
 (5) The fact that the charge is made is equivalent to a statement that every legal
 condition required by law to constitute the offence charged was fulfilled in the particular
 case.
 (6) The charge shall be written in the language of the Court.
 (7) If the accused, having been previously convicted of any offence, is liable, by
 reason of such previous conviction, to enhanced punishment, or to punishment of a different
 kind, for a subsequent offence, and it is intended to prove such previous conviction for the
 purpose of affecting the punishment which the Court may think fit, to award for the
 subsequent offence, the fact, date and place of the previous conviction shall be stated in
 the charge; and if such statement has been omitted, the Court may add it at any time before
 sentence is passed.
 Illustrations.
 (a) A is charged with the murder of B. This is equivalent to a statement that A's act fell
 within the definition of murder given in sections 98 and 99 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
77
 2023; that it did not fall within any of the general exceptions of the said Sanhita; and that it
 did not fall within any of the five exceptions to section 99, or that, if it did fall within
 Exception 1, one or other of the three provisos to that exception applied to it.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 (b) A is charged under section 116 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with
 voluntarily causing grievous hurt to B by means of an instrument for shooting. This is
 equivalent to a statement that the case was not provided for by section 120 of the said
 Sanhita, and that the general exceptions did not apply to it.
 (c) A is accused of murder, cheating, theft, extortion, adultery or criminal intimidation,
 or using a false property-mark. The charge may state that A committed murder, or
 cheating, or theft, or extortion, or adultery, or criminal intimidation, or that he used a false
 property-mark, without reference to the definitions, of those crimes contained in the Bharatiya
 Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; but the sections under which the offence is punishable must, in each
 instance be referred to in the charge.
 (d) A is charged under section 220 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with
 intentionally obstructing a sale of property offered for sale by the lawful authority of a
 public servant. The charge should be in those words.
 235. (1) The charge shall contain such particulars as to the time and place of the
 alleged offence, and the person (if any) against whom, or the thing (if any) in respect of
 which, it was committed, as are reasonably sufficient to give the accused notice of the
 matter with which he is charged.
 (2) When the accused is charged with criminal breach of trust or dishonest
 misappropriation of money or other movable property, it shall be sufficient to specify the
 gross sum or, as the case may be, describe the movable property in respect of which the
 offence is alleged to have been committed, and the dates between which the offence is
 alleged to have been committed, without specifying particular items or exact dates, and the
 charge so framed shall be deemed to be a charge of one offence within the meaning of
 section 242:
 Provided that the time included between the first and last of such dates shall not
 exceed one year.
 236. When the nature of the case is such that the particulars mentioned in
 sections 234 and 235 do not give the accused sufficient notice of the matter with which he
 is charged, the charge shall also contain such particulars of the manner in which the alleged
 offence was committed as will be sufficient for that purpose.
 Illustrations.
 (a) A is accused of the theft of a certain article at a certain time and place. The charge
 need not set out the manner in which the theft was effected.
 (b) A is accused of cheating B at a given time and place. The charge must set out the
 manner in which A cheated B.
 (c) A is accused of giving false evidence at a given time and place. The charge must
 set out that portion of the evidence given by A which is alleged to be false.
 (d) A is accused of obstructing B, a public servant, in the discharge of his public
 functions at a given time and place. The charge must set out the manner in which A obstructed
 B in the discharge of his functions.
 (e) A is accused of the murder of B at a given time and place. The charge need not
 state the manner in which A murdered B.
 (f) A is accused of disobeying a direction of the law with intent to save B from
 punishment. The charge must set out the disobedience charged and the law infringed.
 237. In every charge words used in describing an offence shall be deemed to have
 been used in the sense attached to them respectively by the law under which such offence
 is punishable.
 Particulars as
 to time, place
 and person.
 When manner
 of committing
 offence must
 be stated.
 Words in charge
 taken in sense of
 law under which
 offence is
 punishable.
78
 Effect of
 errors.
 Court may
 alter charge.
 Recall of
 witnesses
 when charge
 altered.
 238. No error in stating either the offence or the particulars required to be stated in
 the charge, and no omission to state the offence or those particulars, shall be regarded at
 any stage of the case as material, unless the accused was in fact misled by such error or
 omission, and it has occasioned a failure of justice.
 Illustrations.
 (a) A is charged under section 178 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with "having
 been in possession of counterfeit coin, having known at the time when he became possessed
 thereof that such coin was counterfeit," the word "fraudulently" being omitted in the charge.
 Unless it appears that A was in fact misled by this omission, the error shall not be regarded
 as material.
 (b) A is charged with cheating B, and the manner in which he cheated B is not set out
 in the charge or is set out incorrectly. A defends himself, calls witnesses and gives his own
 account of the transaction. The Court may infer from this that the omission to set out the
 manner of the cheating is not material.
 (c) A is charged with cheating B, and the manner in which he cheated B is not set out
 in the charge. There were many transactions between A and B, and A had no means of
 knowing to which of them the charge referred, and offered no defence. The Court may infer
 from such facts that the omission to set out the manner of the cheating was, in the case, a
 material error.
 (d) A is charged with the murder of Khoda Baksh on the 21st January, 2023. In fact, the
 murdered person's name was Haidar Baksh, and the date of the murder was the 20th January,
 2023. A was never charged with any murder but one, and had heard the inquiry before the
 Magistrate, which referred exclusively to the case of Haidar Baksh. The Court may infer
 from these facts that A was not misled, and that the error in the charge was immaterial.
 (e) A was charged with murdering Haidar Baksh on the 20th January, 2023, and Khoda
 Baksh (who tried to arrest him for that murder) on the 21st January, 2023. When charged for
 the murder of Haidar Baksh, he was tried for the murder of Khoda Baksh. The witnesses
 present in his defence were witnesses in the case of Haidar Baksh. The Court may infer from
 this that A was misled, and that the error was material.
 239. (1) Any Court may alter or add to any charge at any time before judgment is
 pronounced.
 (2) Every such alteration or addition shall be read and explained to the accused.
 (3) If the alteration or addition to a charge is such that proceeding immediately with
 the trial is not likely, in the opinion of the Court, to prejudice the accused in his defence or
 the prosecutor in the conduct of the case, the Court may, in its discretion, after such
 alteration or addition has been made, proceed with the trial as if the altered or added charge
 had been the original charge.
 (4) If the alteration or addition is such that proceeding immediately with the trial is
 likely, in the opinion of the Court, to prejudice the accused or the prosecutor as aforesaid,
 the Court may either direct a new trial or adjourn the trial for such period as may be necessary.
 (5) If the offence stated in the altered or added charge is one for the prosecution of
 which previous sanction is necessary, the case shall not be proceeded with until such
 sanction is obtained, unless sanction has been already obtained for a prosecution on the
 same facts as those on which the altered or added charge is founded.
 240. Whenever a charge is altered or added to by the Court after the commencement
 of the trial, the prosecutor and the accused shall be allowed—
 (a) to recall or re-summon, and examine with reference to such alteration or
 addition, any witness who may have been examined, unless the Court, for reasons to
 be recorded in writing, considers that the prosecutor or the accused, as the case may
 be, desires to recall or re-examine such witness for the purpose of vexation or delay or
 for defeating the ends of justice;
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
79
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 (b) also to call any further witness whom the Court may think to be material.
 241. (1) For every distinct offence of which any person is accused there shall be a
 separate charge, and every such charge shall be tried separately:
 Provided that where the accused person, by an application in writing, so desires and
 the Magistrate is of opinion that such person is not likely to be prejudiced thereby, the
 Magistrate may try together all or any number of the charges framed against such person.
 (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the operation of the provisions of sections
 242, 243, 244 and 246.
 Illustration.
 A is accused of a theft on one occasion, and of causing grievous hurt on another
 occasion. A must be separately charged and separately tried for the theft and causing
 grievous hurt.
 242. (1) When a person is accused of more offences than one of the same kind
 committed within the space of twelve months from the first to the last of such offences,
 whether in respect of the same person or not, he may be charged with, and tried at one trial
 for, any number of them not exceeding five.
 (2) Offences are of the same kind when they are punishable with the same amount of
 punishment under the same section of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or of any special
 or local law:
 Provided that, for the purposes of this section, an offence punishable under
 section 301 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 shall be deemed to be an offence of the
 same kind as an offence punishable under section 303 of the said Sanhita, and that an
 offence punishable under any section of the said Sanhita, or of any special or local law, shall
 be deemed to be an offence of the same kind as an attempt to commit such offence, when
 such an attempt is an offence.
 243. (1) If, in one series of acts so connected together as to form the same transaction,
 more offences than one are committed by the same person, he may be charged with, and
 tried at one trial for, every such offence.
 (2) When a person charged with one or more offences of criminal breach of trust or
 dishonest misappropriation of property as provided in sub-section (2) of section 235 or in
 sub-section (1) of section 242, is accused of committing, for the purpose of facilitating or
 concealing the commission of that offence or those offences, one or more offences of
 falsification of accounts, he may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, every such
 offence.
 (3) If the acts alleged constitute an offence falling within two or more separate definitions
 of any law in force for the time being by which offences are defined or punished, the person
 accused of them may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, each of such offences.
 (4) If several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves
 constitute an offence, constitute when combined a different offence, the person accused of
 them may be charged with, and tried at one trial for the offence constituted by such acts
 when combined, and for any offence constituted by any one, or more, of such acts.
 (5) Nothing contained in this section shall affect section 12 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
 Sanhita, 2023.
 Illustrations to sub-section (1)
 (a) A rescues B, a person in lawful custody, and in so doing causes grievous hurt to
 C, a constable in whose custody B was. A may be charged with, and convicted of, offences
 under sections 261 and 119 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 (b) A commits house-breaking by day with intent to commit adultery, and commits, in
 the house so entered, adultery with B's wife. A may be separately charged with, and convicted
 of, offences under section 330 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 Separate
 charges for
 distinct
 offences.
 Offences of
 same kind
 within year
 may be
 charged
 together.
 Trial for more
 than one
 offence.
80
 (c) A entices B, the wife of C, away from C, with intent to commit adultery with B, and
 then commits adultery with her. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences
 under section 83 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 (d) A has in his possession several seals, knowing them to be counterfeit and intending
 to use them for the purpose of committing several forgeries punishable under section 335 of
 the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, the
 possession of each seal under section 339 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita.
 (e) With intent to cause injury to B, A institutes a criminal proceeding against him,
 knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such proceeding, and also falsely accuses
 B of having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such
 charge. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, two offences under section
 246 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 (f) A, with intent to cause injury to B, falsely accuses him of having committed an
 offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such charge. On the trial, A gives
 false evidence against B, intending thereby to cause B to be convicted of a capital offence.
 A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 246 and 228
 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 (g) A, with six others, commits the offences of rioting, grievous hurt and assaulting a
 public servant endeavouring in the discharge of his duty as such to suppress the riot. A
 may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 189, 115 and 193
 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 (h) A threatens B, C and D at the same time with injury to their persons with intent to
 cause alarm to them. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, each of the three
 offences under section 309 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 The separate charges referred to in illustrations (a) to (h), respectively, may be tried
 at the same time.
 Illustrations to sub-section (3)
 (i) A wrongfully strikes B with a cane. A may be separately charged with, and convicted
 of, offences under sections 129 and 113 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 (j) Several stolen sacks of corn are made over to A and B, who knew they are stolen
 property, for the purpose of concealing them. A and B thereupon voluntarily assist each
 other to conceal the sacks at the bottom of a grain-pit. A and B may be separately charged
 with, and convicted of, offences under section 315 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 (k) A exposes her child with the knowledge that she is thereby likely to cause its
 death. The child dies in consequence of such exposure. A may be separately charged with,
 and convicted of, offences under sections 91 and 103 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 (l) A dishonestly uses a forged document as genuine evidence, in order to convict B,
 a public servant, of an offence under section 199 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. A
 may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 338 (read with
 section 466) and 196 of that Sanhita.
 Illustration to sub-section (4)
 (m) A commits robbery on B, and in doing so voluntarily causes hurt to him. A may be
 separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 323, 392 and 394 of the
 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
 Where it is
 doubtful what
 offence has
 been
 committed.
 244. (1) If a single act or series of acts is of such a nature that it is doubtful which of
 several offences the facts which can be proved will constitute, the accused may be charged
 with having committed all or any of such offences, and any number of such charges may be
 tried at once; or he may be charged in the alternative with having committed some one of the
 said offences.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
81
 (2) If in such a case the accused is charged with one offence, and it appears in
 evidence that he committed a different offence for which he might have been charged under
 the provisions of sub-section (1), he may be convicted of the offence which he is shown to
 have committed, although he was not charged with it.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 Illustrations.
 (a) A is accused of an act which may amount to theft, or receiving stolen property, or
 criminal breach of trust or cheating. He may be charged with theft, receiving stolen property,
 criminal breach of trust and cheating, or he may be charged with having committed theft, or
 receiving stolen property, or criminal breach of trust or cheating.
 (b) In the case mentioned, A is only charged with theft. It appears that he committed
 the offence of criminal breach of trust, or that of receiving stolen goods. He may be convicted
 of criminal breach of trust or of receiving stolen goods (as the case may be), though he was
 not charged with such offence.
 (c) A states on oath before the Magistrate that he saw B hit C with a club. Before the
 Sessions Court A states on oath that B never hit C. A may be charged in the alternative and
 convicted of intentionally giving false evidence, although it cannot be proved which of
 these contradictory statements was false.
 245. (1) When a person is charged with an offence consisting of several particulars,
 a combination of some only of which constitutes a complete minor offence, and such
 combination is proved, but the remaining particulars are not proved, he may be convicted of
 the minor offence, though he was not charged with it.
 (2) When a person is charged with an offence and facts are proved which reduce it
 to a minor offence, he may be convicted of the minor offence, although he is not charged
 with it.
 (3) When a person is charged with an offence, he may be convicted of an attempt to
 commit such offence although the attempt is not separately charged.
 (4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a conviction of any minor
 offence where the conditions requisite for the initiation of proceedings in respect of that
 minor offence have not been satisfied.
 Illustrations.
 (a) A is charged, under section 314 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with criminal
 breach of trust in respect of property entrusted to him as a carrier. It appears, that he did
 commit criminal breach of trust under section 314 of that Sanhita in respect of the property,
 but that it was not entrusted to him as a carrier. He may be convicted of criminal breach of
 trust under the said section 314.
 (b) A is charged, under section 115 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, with causing
 grievous hurt. He proves that he acted on grave and sudden provocation. He may be
 convicted under section 120 of that Sanhita.
 246. The following persons may be charged and tried together, namely:—
 (a) persons accused of the same offence committed in the course of the same
 transaction;
 (b) persons accused of an offence and persons accused of abetment of, or
 attempt to commit, such offence;
 (c) persons accused of more than one offence of the same kind, within the
 meaning of section 242 committed by them jointly within the period of twelve months;
 (d) persons accused of different offences committed in the course of the same
 transaction;
 (e) persons accused of an offence which includes theft, extortion, cheating, or
 criminal misappropriation, and persons accused of receiving or retaining, or assisting
 in the disposal or concealment of, property possession of which is alleged to have
 When offence
 proved
 included in
 offence
 charged.
 What persons
 may be
 charged
 jointly.
82
 been transferred by any such offence committed by the first-named persons, or of
 abetment of or attempting to commit any such last-named offence;
 (f) persons accused of offences under section 315 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
 Sanhita, 2023 or either of those sections in respect of stolen property the possession
 of which has been transferred by one offence;
 (g) persons accused of any offence under Chapter XII of the Bharatiya Nyaya
 Sanhita, 2023 relating to counterfeit coin and persons accused of any other offence
 under the said Chapter relating to the same coin, or of abetment of or attempting to
 commit any such offence; and the provisions contained in the former part of this
 Chapter shall, so far as may be, apply to all such charges:
 Provided that where a number of persons are charged with separate offences and
 such persons do not fall within any of the categories specified in this section, the Magistrate
 or Court of Session may, if such persons by an application in writing, so desire, and if he or
 it is satisfied that such persons would not be prejudicially affected thereby, and it is expedient
 so to do, try all such persons together.
 Withdrawal of
 remaining
 charges on
 conviction on
 one of several
 charges.
 Trial to be
 conducted by
 Public
 Prosecutor.
 Opening case
 for
 prosecution.
 Discharge.
 Framing of
 charge.
 247. When a charge containing more heads than one is framed against the same
 person, and when a conviction has been had on one or more of them, the complainant, or
 the officer conducting the prosecution, may, with the consent of the Court, withdraw the
 remaining charge or charges, or the Court of its own accord may stay the inquiry into, or trial
 of, such charge or charges and such withdrawal shall have the effect of an acquittal on such
 charge or charges, unless the conviction be set aside, in which case the said Court (subject
 to the order of the Court setting aside the conviction) may proceed with the inquiry into, or
 trial of, the charge or charges so withdrawn.
 CHAPTER XX
 TRIAL BEFORE A COURT OF SESSION
 248. In every trial before a Court of Session, the prosecution shall be conducted by a
 Public Prosecutor.
 249. When the accused appears or is brought before the Court, in pursuance of a
 commitment of the case under section 232, or under any other law for the time being in force,
 the prosecutor shall open his case by describing the charge brought against the accused
 and stating by what evidence he proposes to prove the guilt of the accused.
 250. (1) The accused may prefer an application for discharge within a period of
 sixty days from the date of committal under section 232.
 (2) If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents submitted
 therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this
 behalf, the Judge considers that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the
 accused, he shall discharge the accused and record his reasons for so doing.
 251. (1) If, after such consideration and hearing as aforesaid, the Judge is of opinion
 that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence which—
 (a) is not exclusively triable by the Court of Session, he may, frame a charge
 against the accused and, by order, transfer the case for trial to the Chief Judicial
 Magistrate, or any other Judicial Magistrate of the first class and direct the accused
 to appear before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or the Judicial Magistrate of the first
 class, on such date as he deems fit, and thereupon such Magistrate shall try the
 offence in accordance with the procedure for the trial of warrant-cases instituted on a
 police report;
 (b) is exclusively triable by the Court, he shall frame in writing a charge against
 the accused within a period of sixty days from the date of first hearing on charge.
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
