may by law empower any other court to exercise within the local limits of its jurisdiction all or any of the 
powers exercisable by the Supreme Court under clause (2). 
(4) The right guaranteed by this article shall not be suspended except as otherwise provided for by this 
Constitution. 
1
 [32A.Constitutional validity of State laws not to be considered in proceedings under article 32.].– 
Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 3 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 
2
 [33. Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by this Part in their application to Forces, 
etc.—Parliament may, by law, determine to what extent any of the rights conferred by this Part shall, in their 
application to,— 
(a) the members of the Armed Forces; or 
(b) the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order; or 
(c) persons employed in any bureau or other organisation established by the State for purposes of 
intelligence or counter intelligence; or 
(d) person employed in, or in connection with, the telecommunication systems set up for the 
purposes of any Force, bureau or organisation referred to in clauses (a) to (c), 
be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of 
discipline among them.] 
34. Restriction on rights conferred by this Part while martial law is in force in any area.—
 Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, Parliament may by law indemnify any 
person in the service of the Union or of a State or any other person in respect of any act done by him in 
connection with the maintenance or restoration of order in any area within the territory of India where 
martial law was in force or validate any sentence passed, punishment inflicted, forfeiture ordered or other act 
done under martial law in such area. 
35. Legislation to give effect to the provisions of this Part.—Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution,—  
(a) Parliament shall have, and the Legislature of a State shall not have, power to make laws— 
(i) with respect to any of the matters which under clause (3) of article 16, clause (3) of article 32, 
article 33 and article 34 may be provided for by law made by Parliament; and  
(ii) for prescribing punishment for those acts which are declared to be offences under this Part,  
and Parliament shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of this Constitution, make laws for 
prescribing punishment for the acts referred to in sub-clause (ii); 
(b) any law in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution in the territory of 
India with respect to any of the matters referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) or providing for 
punishment for any act referred to in sub-clause (ii) of that clause shall, subject to the terms thereof and 
to any adaptations and modifications that may be made therein under article 372, continue in force until 
altered or repealed or amended by Parliament. 
Explanation.—In this article, the expression ―law in force‖ has the same meaning as in article 372.  
1.Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 
2.Subs. by the Constitution (Fiftieth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11-9-1984). 
33 
PART IV 
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY 
36. Definition.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, ―the State‖ has the same meaning as 
in Part III. 
37. Application of the principles contained in this Part.—The provisions contained in this Part shall 
not be enforceable by any court, but the principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the 
governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws. 
38. State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the people.—1[(1)] The State shall 
strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in 
which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the national life. 
2
 [(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimise the inequalities in income, and endeavour to 
eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities, not only amongst individuals but also amongst 
groups of people residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations.] 
39. Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State.—The State shall, in particular, direct its 
policy towards securing— 
(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood; 
(b)that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as 
best to subserve the common good; 
(c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and 
means of production to the common detriment; 
(d) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women; 
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and the tender age of children are not 
abused and that citizens are not forced by economic necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or 
strength; 
3
 [(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in 
conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and 
against moral and material abandonment.] 
4
 [39A. Equal justice and free legal aid.—The State shall secure that the operation of the legal system 
promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable 
legislation or schemes or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to 
any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities.] 
40. Organisation of village panchayats.—The State shall take steps to organise village panchayats   
1. Art. 38 renumbered as cl. (1) thereof by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 9 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
2. Ins. by ibid. 
3.Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 7, for cl. (f) (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).    
4. Ins. by s. 8 ibid.  
34 
and endow them with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as units of 
self-government. 
41. Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain cases.—The State shall, within the 
limits of its economic capacity and development, make effective provision for securing the right to work, to 
education and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, and in other 
cases of undeserved want. 
42. Provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity relief.—The State shall make 
provision for securing just and humane conditions of work and for maternity relief. 
43. Living wage, etc., for workers.—The State shall endeavour to secure, by suitable legislation or 
economic organisation or in any other way, to all workers, agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work, a 
living wage, conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social 
and cultural opportunities and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to promote cottage industries on an 
individual or co-operative basis in rural areas. 
1
 [43A. Participation of workers in management of industries.—The State shall take steps, by suitable 
legislation or in any other way, to secure the participation of workers in the management of undertakings, 
establishments or other organisations engaged in any industry.] 
2
 [43B. Promotion of co-operative societies.—The State shall endeavour to promote voluntary 
formation, autonomous functioning, democratic control and professional management of co-operative 
societies.] 
44. Uniform civil code for the citizens.—The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform 
civil code throughout the territory of India. 
3
 [45. Provision for early childhood care and education to children below the age of six years.—The 
State shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the 
age of six years.] 
46. Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and 
other weaker sections.—The State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests 
of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, 
and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation. 
47. Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public 
health.—The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people 
and the improvement of public health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the State shall 
endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating 
drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health. 
48. Organisation of agriculture and animal husbandry.—The State shall endeavour to organise 
agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and shall, in particular, take steps for 
preserving and improving the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and 
draught cattle. 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 9 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).    
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 2011, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15-2-2012).  
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 3 for art. 45 (w.e.f. 1-4-2010).  
35 
1
 [48A. Protection and improvement of environment and safeguarding of forests and wild life.—
 The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life 
of the country.] 
49. Protection of monuments and places and objects of national importance.—It shall be the 
obligation of the State to protect every monument or place or object of artistic or historic interest, 2[declared 
by or under law made by Parliament] to be of national importance, from spoliation, disfigurement, 
destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case may be. 
50. Separation of judiciary from executive.—The State shall take steps to separate the judiciary from 
the executive in the public services of the State. 
51. Promotion of international peace and security.—The State shall endeavour to— 
(a) promote international peace and security; 
(b) maintain just and honourable relations between nations; 
(c) foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised peoples 
with one another; and 
(d) encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration. 
3
 [PART  IVA 
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES 
51A. Fundamental duties.—It shall be the duty of every citizen of India— 
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the 
National Anthem; 
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom; 
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India; 
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so; 
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India 
transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory 
to the dignity of women; 
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture; 
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and 
to have compassion for living creatures; 
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform; 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 10 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).    
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for ―declared by parliament by law‖ (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 11 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).    
36 
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence; 
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation 
constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement; 
1
 [(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his child or, as  the case 
may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.] 
PART  V 
THE UNION 
CHAPTER I.—THE EXECUTIVE 
The President and Vice-President 
52. The President of India.—There shall be a President of India. 
53. Executive power of the Union.—(1) The executive power of the Union shall be vested in the President 
and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this 
Constitution. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the supreme command of the Defence 
Forces of the Union shall be vested in the President and the exercise thereof shall be regulated by law. 
(3) Nothing in this article shall— 
(a) be deemed to transfer to the President any functions conferred by any existing law on the 
Government of any State or other authority; or 
(b) prevent Parliament from conferring by law functions on authorities other than the President. 
54. Election of President.—The President shall be elected by the members of an electoral college 
consisting of— 
(a) the elected members of both Houses of Parliament; and 
(b) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States. 
2
 [Explanation.—In this article and in article 55, ―State‖ includes the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi and the Union territory of *Pondicherry.] 
55. Manner of election of President.—(1) As far as practicable, there shall be uniformity in the scale of 
representation of the different States at the election of the President. 
(2) For the purpose of securing such uniformity among the States inter se as well as parity between the 
States as a whole and the Union, the number of votes which each elected member of Parliament and of the 
Legislative Assembly of each State is entitled to cast at such election shall be determined in the following 
manner:— 
(a) every elected member of the Legislative Assembly of a State shall have as many votes as there 
are multiples of one thousand in the quotient obtained by dividing the population of the State by the total 
number of the elected members of the Assembly; 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-4-2010).   
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventieth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-6-1995).  
* Now Puducherry vide the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s.3 (w.e.f. 1-10-2006). 
37 
(b) if, after taking the said multiples of one thousand, the remainder is not less than five hundred, 
then the vote of each member referred to in sub-clause (a) shall be further increased by one; 
(c) each elected member of either House of Parliament shall have such number of votes as may be 
obtained by dividing the total number of votes assigned to the members of the Legislative Assemblies of 
the States under sub-clauses (a) and (b)by the total number of the elected members of both Houses of 
Parliament, fractions exceeding one-half being counted as one and other fractions being disregarded. 
(3) The election of the President shall be held in accordance with the system of proportional 
representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such election shall be by secret 
ballot. 
1
 [Explanation.—In this article, the expression ―population‖ means the population as ascertained at the 
last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published: 
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures 
have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2[2026 have been 
published, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.] 
56. Term of office of President.—(1) The President shall hold office for a term of five years from the 
date on which he enters upon his office: 
Provided that— 
(a) the President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the Vice-President, resign his office; 
(b) the President may, for violation of the Constitution, be removed from office by impeachment in 
the manner provided in article 61; 
(c) the President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his 
successor enters upon his office. 
(2) Any resignation addressed to the Vice-President under clause (a) of the proviso to clause (1) shall 
forthwith be communicated by him to the Speaker of the House of the People. 
57. Eligibility for re-election.—A person who holds, or who has held, office as President shall, subject 
to the other provisions of this Constitution, be eligible for re-election to that office. 
58. Qualifications for election as President.—(1) No person shall be eligible for election as President 
unless he— 
(a) is a citizen of India, 
(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years, and 
(c) is qualified for election as a member of the House of the People. 
(2) A person shall not be eligible for election as President if he holds any office of profit under the 
Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the 
control of any of the said Governments. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be deemed to hold any office of profit 
by reason only that he is the President or Vice-President of the Union or the Governor3*** of any State or is 
a Minister either for the Union or for any State. 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 12, for the Explanation (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).   
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 2, for 2000 (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).   
3. The words ―or Rajpramukh or Uparajpramukh‖omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,  s. 29 and Sch. 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
38 
59. Conditions of President's office.—(1) The President shall not be a member of either House of 
Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State, and if a member of either House of Parliament or of 
a House of the Legislature of any State be elected President, he shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in 
that House on the date on which he enters upon his office as President. 
(2) The President shall not hold any other office of profit. 
(3) The President shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use of his official residences and shall 
be also entitled to such emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law 
and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances and privileges as are specified in 
the Second Schedule. 
(4) The emoluments and allowances of the President shall not be diminished during his term of office. 
60. Oath or affirmation by the President.—Every President and every person acting as President or 
discharging the functions of the President shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe in the 
presence of the Chief Justice of India or, in his absence, the senior-most Judge of the Supreme Court 
available, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is to say— ―I,  A.B., do swear in the name of  God  that I will  faithfully  execute the office     
solemnly affirm 
of President (or discharge the functions of the President) of India and will to the best of my ability preserve,  
protect  and  defend  the Constitution  and  the  law  and  that  I  will  devote  myself  to  the  service  and  well
being of  the  people  of  India.". 
61. Procedure for impeachment of the President.—(1) When a President is to be impeached for 
violation of the Constitution, the charge shall be preferred by either House of Parliament. 
(2) No such charge shall be preferred unless— 
(a) the proposal to prefer such charge is contained in a resolution which has been moved after at 
least fourteen days' notice in writing signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members 
of the House has been given of their intention to move the resolution, and 
(b) such resolution has been passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership 
of the House. 
(3) When a charge has been so preferred by either House of Parliament, the other House shall investigate 
the charge or cause the charge to be investigated and the President shall have the right to appear and to be 
represented at such investigation. 
(4) If as a result of the investigation a resolution is passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the 
total membership of the House by which the charge was investigated or caused to be investigated, declaring 
that the charge preferred against the President has been sustained, such resolution shall have the effect of 
removing the President from his office as from the date on which the resolution is so passed. 
62. Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of President and the term of office of 
person elected to fill casual vacancy.—(1) An election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the 
term of office of President shall be completed before the expiration of the term. 
(2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of President occurring by reason of his death, resignation 
or removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon as possible after,  and in no case later than six months from, 
the date of occurrence of the vacancy; and the person elected to fill the vacancy shall, subject to the 
provisions of article 56, be entitled to hold office for the full term of five years from the date on which he 
39 
enters upon his office. 
63. The Vice-President of India.—There shall be a Vice-President of India. 
64. The Vice-President to be ex officio Chairman of the Council of States.—The Vice-President shall 
be ex officio Chairman of the Council of the States and shall not hold any other office of profit: 
Provided that during any period when the Vice-President acts as President or discharges the functions of 
the President under article 65, he shall not perform the duties of the office of Chairman of the Council of 
States and shall not be entitled to any salary or allowance payable to the Chairman of the Council of States 
under article 97. 
65. The Vice-President  to act  as  President  or to discharge  his  functions during  casual  
vacancies  in  the  office, or during  the  absence,  of  President.—(1) In the event of the occurrence of 
any vacancy in the office of the President by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise, the 
Vice-President shall act as President until the date on which a new President elected in accordance with the 
provisions of this Chapter to fill such vacancy enters upon his office. 
(2) When the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, 
the Vice-President shall discharge his functions until the date on which the President resumes his duties. 
(3) The Vice-President shall, during, and in respect of, the period while he is so acting as, or discharging 
the functions of, President, have all the powers and immunities of the President and be entitled to such 
emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in 
that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances and privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule. 
66. Election of Vice-President.—(1) The Vice-President shall be elected by the 1[members of an 
electoral college consisting of the members of both Houses of Parliament] in accordance with the system of 
proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such election shall be 
by secret ballot. 
(2) The Vice-President shall not be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the 
Legislature of any State, and if a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of 
any State be elected Vice-President, he shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date on 
which he enters upon his office as Vice-President. 
(3) No person shall be eligible for election as Vice-President unless he— 
(a) is a citizen of India; 
(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years; and 
(c) is qualified for election as a member of the Council of States. 
(4) A person shall not be eligible for election as Vice-President if he holds any office of profit under the 
Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the 
control of any of the said Governments. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be deemed to hold any office of profit 
by reason only that he is the President or Vice-President of the Union or the Governor2*** of any State or is 
a Minister either for the Union or for any State. 
67. Term of office of Vice-President.—The Vice-President shall hold office for a term of five years 
1.Subs. by the Constitution (Eleventh Amendment) Act,1961, s.2, for ―members of both Houses of Parliament assembled at a joint 
meeting‖(w.e.f. 19-12-1961). 
2. The words ―or Rajpramukh or Uparajpramukh‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,  s. 29 and Sch. 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
40 
from the date on which he enters upon his office: 
Provided that— 
(a) a Vice-President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office; 
(b) a Vice-President may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council of States passed 
by a majority of all the then members of the Council and agreed to by the House of the People; but no 
resolution for the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has been 
given of the intention to move the resolution; 
(c) a Vice-President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until 
his successor enters upon his office. 
68. Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of Vice-President and the term of office of 
person elected to fill casual vacancy.—(1) An election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the 
term of office of Vice-President shall be completed before the expiration of the term. 
(2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of Vice-President occurring by reason of his death, 
resignation or removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon as possible after the occurrence of the vacancy, 
and the person elected to fill the vacancy shall, subject to the provisions of article 67, be entitled to hold 
office for the full term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office. 
69. Oath or affirmation by the Vice-President.—Every Vice-President shall, before entering upon his 
office, make and subscribe before the President, or some  person   appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or 
affirmation in the following form, that is to say— ―I, A.B., do swear in the name of Godthat  I  will  bear   true  faith  and                                                 
solemnly affirm                                                     
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon 
which I am about to enter.‖.  
70. Discharge of President's functions in other contingencies.—Parliament may make such 
provisions as it thinks fit for the discharge of the functions of the President in any contingency not provided 
for in this Chapter. 
1
 [71. Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of a President or Vice-President.—(1) All 
doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the election of a President or Vice-President shall be 
inquired into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision shall be final. 
(2) If the election of a person as President or Vice-President is declared void by the Supreme Court, acts 
done by him in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of the office of President or Vice
President, as the case may be, on or before the date of the decision of the Supreme Court shall not be 
invalidated by reason of that declaration. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may by law regulate any matter relating to 
or connected with the election of a President or Vice-President. 
(4) The election of a person as President or Vice-President shall not be called in question on the ground 
1. Art. 71 has been successively subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act,1975, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10-8-1975) and the 
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 10 to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
41 
of the existence of any vacancy for whatever reason among the members of the electoral college electing 
him.] 
72. Power of President to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in 
certain cases.—(1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of 
punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence— 
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial; 
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any law relating to a 
matter to which the executive power of the Union extends; 
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death. 
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the power conferred by law on any officer of the 
Armed Forces of the Union to suspend, remit or commute a sentence passed by a Court Martial. 
(3) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of clause (1) shall affect the power to suspend, remit or commute a sentence 
of death exercisable by the Governor 1*** of a State under any law for the time being in force. 
73. Extent of executive power of the Union.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the 
executive power of the Union shall extend— 
(a) to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws; and 
(b) to the exercise of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as are  exercisable by the Government of 
India by virtue of any treaty or agreement: 
Provided that the executive power referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not, save as expressly provided in 
this Constitution or in any law made by Parliament, extend in any State2*** to matters with respect to 
which the Legislature of the State has also power to make laws. 
(2) Until otherwise provided by Parliament, a State and any officer or authority of a State may, 
notwithstanding anything in this article, continue to exercise in matters with respect to which Parliament has 
power to make laws for that State such executive power or functions as the State or officer or authority thereof 
could exercise immediately before the commencement of this Constitution. 
Council of Ministers 
74. Council of Ministers to aid and advise President.—3[(1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with 
the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President who shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in 
accordance with such advice:] 
4
 [Provided that the President may require the Council of Ministers to reconsider such advice, either 
generally or otherwise, and the President shall act in accordance with the advice tendered after such 
reconsideration.] 
(2) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by Ministers to the President shall not 
be inquired into in any court. 
1. The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,  s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. The words and letters ―specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956,  s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 13 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).    
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 11 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
42 
75. Other provisions as to Ministers.—(1) The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and 
the other Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister. 
1
 [(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the Council of Ministers shall not 
exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number of members of the House of the People.   
(1B) A member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political party who is disqualified for being 
a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a 
Minister under clause (1) for duration of the period commencing from the date of his disqualification till the 
date on which the term of his office as such member would expire or where he contests any election to either 
House of Parliament before the expiry of such period, till the date on which he is declared elected, whichever is 
earlier.] 
(2) The Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the President. 
(3) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House of the People. 
(4) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the President shall administer to him the oaths of office and of 
secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule. 
(5) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of either House of 
Parliament shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister. 
(6) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as Parliament may from time to time by law 
determine and, until Parliament so determines, shall be as specified in the Second Schedule. 
The Attorney-General for India 
76. Attorney-General for India.—(1) The President shall appoint a person who is qualified to be 
appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court to be Attorney-General for India. 
(2) It shall be the duty of the Attorney-General to give advice to the Government of India upon such 
legal matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal character, as may from time to time be referred or 
assigned to him by the President, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or under this 
Constitution or any other law for the time being in force. 
(3) In the performance of his duties the Attorney-General shall have right of audience in all courts in the 
territory of India. 
(4) The Attorney-General shall hold office during the pleasure of the President, and shall receive such 
remuneration as the President may determine. 
Conduct of Government Business 
77. Conduct of business of the Government of India.—(1) All executive action of the Government of 
India shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the President. 
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the President shall be authenticated 
in such manner as may be specified in rules2 to be made by the President, and the validity of an order or 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-1-2004).  
2. See notification No. S.O.  2297, dated the 3rd November, 1958,  Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 1958, Pt. II, Sec. 3 (ii), p. 1315, 
as amended from time to time. 
43 
instrument which is so authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or 
instrument made or executed by the President. 
(3) The President shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the 
Government of India, and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business. 
1*   
*         
*         
*   
* 
78. Duties of Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of information to the President, etc.—It shall 
be the duty of the Prime Minister— 
(a)to communicate to the President all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the 
administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation; 
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and 
proposals for legislation as the President may call for; and 
(c)if the President so requires, to submit for the consideration of the Council of Ministers any matter 
on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which has not been considered by the Council. 
CHAPTER II.—PARLIAMENT 
General 
79. Constitution of Parliament.—There shall be a Parliament for the Union which shall consist of the 
President and two Houses to be known respectively as the Council of States and the House of the People. 
80. Composition of the Council of States.—(1) 2[3*** The Council of States] shall consist of— 
(a) twelve members to be nominated by the President in accordance with the provisions of          
clause (3); and 
(b) not more than two hundred and thirty-eight representatives of the States 4[and of the Union 
territories.] 
(2) The allocation of seats in the Council of States to be filled by representatives of the States 4[and of 
the Union territories] shall be in accordance with the provisions in that behalf contained in the Fourth 
Schedule. 
(3) The members to be  nominated  by  the  President  under  sub-clause (a) of clause (1)  shall consist of  
1. Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 14 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and omitted by the Constitution 
(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 12 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 3, for ―The Council of States‖ (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).  
3. The words ―Subject to the provisions of paragraph 4 of the Tenth Schedule,‖ omitted by the Constitution (Thirty-sixth 
Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975). 
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
44 
persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of such matters as the following, 
namely:— 
Literature, science, art and social service. 
(4) The representatives of each State 1*** in the Council of States shall be elected by the elected 
members of the Legislative Assembly of the State in accordance with the system of proportional 
representation by means of the single transferable vote. 
(5) The representatives of the 2[Union territories] in the Council of States shall be chosen in such manner 
as Parliament may by law prescribe. 
3
 [81. Composition of the House of the People.—(1) 4[Subject to the provisions of article 331 5***],   
the House of the People shall consist of— 
(a) not more than 6[five hundred and thirty members] chosen by direct election from territorial 
constituencies in the States, and 
(b) not more than 7[twenty members] to represent the Union territories, chosen in such manner as 
Parliament may by law provide. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),— 
(a) there shall be allotted to each State a number of seats in the House of the People in such manner 
that the ratio between that number and the population of the State is, so far as practicable, the same for 
all States; and 
(b) each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio between 
the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it is, so far as practicable, the 
same throughout the State: 
8
 [Provided that the provisions of sub-clause (a)of this clause shall not be applicable for the purpose 
of allotment of seats in the House of the People to any State so long as the population of that State does 
not exceed six millions.] 
(3) In this article, the expression ―population‖ means the population as ascertained at the last preceding 
census of which the relevant figures have been published: 
1. The words and letters ―specified in Part A and Part B of the First Schedule‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Subs. by ibid., for ―States specified in Part C of the First Schedule‖. 
3. Subs. by ibid., s. 4, for arts. 81 and 82. 
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 4, for ―Subject to the provisions of article 331‖                   
(w.e.f. 1-3-1975).  
5. The words and figure ―and paragraph 4 of the Tenth Schedule,‖ omitted by the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, 
s. 5 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975). 
6. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu  Reorganisation  Act,  1987 (18 of 1987),  s. 63,  for ―five hundred  and  twenty-five  members‖, 
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987). 
7. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-first Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 2, for ―twenty-five members‖ (w.e.f. 17-10-1973).  
8. Ins. by ibid.  
45 
1
 [Provided that the reference in this clause to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have 
been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2[2026] have been 
published, 3[be construed,— 
(i) for the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and the proviso to that clause, as a reference to the 
1971 census; and 
(ii) for the purposes of sub-clause (b)of clause (2) as a reference to the 4[2001] census.] 
82. Readjustment after each census.—Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of seats in 
the House of the People to the States and the division of each State into territorial constituencies shall be 
readjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine: 
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the House of the People until the 
dissolution of the then existing House: 
Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the President may, by order, 
specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any election to the House may be held on the basis of the 
territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment: 
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 5[2026] have been 
published, it shall not be necessary to 6[readjust— 
(i) the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States as readjusted on the basis of the 
1971 census; and  
(ii) the division of each State into territorial constituencies as may be readjusted on the basis of the 
7
 [2001] census, 
under this article.] 
83. Duration of Houses of Parliament.—(1) The Council of States shall not be subject to dissolution, 
but as nearly as possible one-third of the members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on the expiration of 
every second year in accordance with the provisions made in that behalf by Parliament by law. 
(2) The House of the People, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for 8[five years] from the date 
appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the expiration of the said period of 8[five years] shall 
operate as a dissolution of the House: 
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, be extended by 
Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at a time and not extending in any case beyond a 
period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate. 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 15 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).    
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 3, for ―2000‖ (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).  
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).  
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2, for ―1991‖ (w.e.f. 22-6-2003).  
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 4, for ―2000‖ (w.e.f. 21-2-2002). 
6. Subs. by ibid., for certain words.  
7. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3, for ―1991‖ (w.e.f. 22-6-2003).  
8. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 13, for ―six years‖ (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).The words ―six years‖. 
were subs. for the original words ―five years‖ by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 17 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
46 
84. Qualification for membership of Parliament.—A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill 
a seat in Parliament unless he— 
1
 [(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some person authorised in that behalf by 
the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the 
Third Schedule;] 
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than thirty years of age and, in the case 
of a seat in the House of the People, not less than twenty-five years of age; and 
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf by or under any law made 
by Parliament. 
2
 [85. Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution.—(1) The President shall from time to time 
summon each House of Parliament to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not 
intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session. 
(2) The President may from time to time— 
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House; 
(b) dissolve the House of the People.] 
86. Right of President to address and send messages to Houses.—(1) The President may address 
either House of Parliament or both Houses assembled together, and for that purpose require the attendance of 
members. 
(2) The President may send messages to either House of Parliament, whether with respect to a Bill then 
pending in Parliament or otherwise, and a House to which any message is so sent shall with all convenient 
despatch consider any matter required by the message to be taken into consideration. 
87. Special address by the President.—(1) At the commencement of 3[the first session after each 
general election to the House of the People and at the commencement of the first session of each year] the 
President shall address both Houses of Parliament assembled together and inform Parliament of the causes of 
its summons. 
(2) Provision shall be made by the rules regulating the procedure of either House for the allotment of 
time for discussion of the matters referred to in such address4***. 
88. Rights of Ministers and Attorney-General as respects Houses.—Every Minister and the 
Attorney-General of India shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, 
either House, any joint sitting of the Houses, and any committee of Parliament of which he may be named a 
member, but shall not by virtue of this article be entitled to vote. 
Officers of Parliament 
89. The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States.—(1) The Vice- President of India 
shall be ex officio Chairman of the Council of States. 
(2) The Council of States shall, as soon as may be, choose a member of the Council to be Deputy 
Chairman thereof and, so often as the office of Deputy Chairman becomes vacant, the Council shall choose 
another member to be Deputy Chairman thereof. 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 3 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 6 (w.e.f 18-6-1951). 
3. Subs. by ibid., s. 7, for ―every session‖. 
4. The words ―and for the precedence of such discussion over other business of the House‖ omitted by ibid. 
47 
90. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the office of Deputy Chairman.—A member 
holding office as Deputy Chairman of the Council of States— 
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Council; 
(b) may at any time, by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairman, resign his office; and 
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council passed by a majority of all the 
then members of the Council: 
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c)shall be moved unless at least fourteen days‘ 
notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution. 
91. Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act 
as, Chairman.—(1) While the office of Chairman is vacant, or during any period when theVice-President is 
acting as, or discharging the functions of, President, the duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy 
Chairman, or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also vacant, by such member of the Council of States as 
the President may appoint for the purpose. 
(2)During the absence of the Chairman from any sitting of the Council of States the Deputy Chairman, or, if 
he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Council, or, if no such person 
is present, such other person as may be determined by the Council, shall act as Chairman. 
92.  The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a resolution for his removal from 
office is under consideration.—(1) At any sitting of the Council of States, while any resolution for the 
removal of the Vice-President from his office is under consideration, the Chairman, or while any resolution 
for the removal of the Deputy Chairman from his office is under consideration, the Deputy Chairman, shall 
not, though he is present, preside, and the provisions of clause (2) of article 91 shall apply in relation to 
every such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Chairman, or, as the case may be, the 
Deputy Chairman, is absent. 
(2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the 
Council of States while any resolution for the removal of the Vice-President from his office is under 
consideration in the Council, but, notwithstanding anything in article 100, shall not be entitled to vote at all 
on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings. 
93. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.—The House of the People shall, as 
soon as may be, choose two members of the House to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof 
and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the House shall choose another 
member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be. 
94. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker.—
 A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the House of the People— 
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the House of the People; 
(b) may at any time, by writing under his hand addressed, if such member is the Speaker, to the 
Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and 
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the House of the People passed by a majority 
of all the then members of the House: 
48 
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c)shall be moved unless at least fourteen  
days‘ notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution: 
Provided further that, whenever the House of the People is dissolved, the Speaker shall not vacate 
his office until immediately before the first meeting of the House of the People after the dissolution. 
95. Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the duties of the office of, or to act  
as, Speaker.—(1) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the 
Deputy Speaker or, if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the House of the 
People as the President may appoint for the purpose. 
(2) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the House of the People the Deputy Speaker or, if he 
is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the House, or, if no such person is 
present, such other person as may be determined by the House, shall act as Speaker. 
96. The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from 
office is under consideration.—(1) At any sitting of the House of the People, while any resolution for the 
removal of the Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any resolution for the 
removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Deputy Speaker, shall not, though 
he is present, preside, and the provisions of clause (2) of article 95 shall apply in relation to every such 
sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Speaker, or, as the case may be, the Deputy 
Speaker, is absent.  
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the 
House of the People while any resolution for his removal from office is under consideration in the House and 
shall, notwithstanding anything in article 100, be entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution 
or on any other matter during such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of votes. 
97. Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman and the Speaker and Deputy 
Speaker.—There shall be paid to the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States, and to 
the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, such salaries and allowances as may be 
respectively fixed by Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and 
allowances as are specified in the Second Schedule. 
98. Secretariat of Parliament.—(1) Each House of Parliament shall have a separate secretarial staff: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the creation of posts common to 
both Houses of Parliament. 
(2) Parliament may by law regulate the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, 
to the secretarial staff of either House of Parliament. 
(3) Until provision is made by Parliament under clause (2), the President may, after consultation with the 
Speaker of the House of the People or the Chairman of the Council of States, as the case may be, make rules 
regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of the 
House of the People or the Council of States, and any rules so made shall have effect subject to the 
provisions of any law made under the said clause. 
Conduct of Business 
99. Oath or affirmation by members.—Every member of either House of Parliament shall, before 
taking his seat, make and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him,    
49 
an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule. 
100. Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum.—(1) Save 
as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all questions at any sitting of either House or joint sitting of the 
Houses shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other than the Speaker 
or person acting as Chairman or Speaker. 
The Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the first instance, but shall have and 
exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes. 
(2) Either House of Parliament shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership 
thereof, and any proceedings in Parliament shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that 
some person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings. 
1
 [(3) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the quorum to constitute a meeting of either House of 
Parliament shall be one-tenth of the total number of members of the House. 
(4) If at any time during a meeting of a House there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Chairman or 
Speaker, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is a 
quorum.] 
Disqualifications of Members 
101. Vacation of seats.—(1) No person shall be a member of both Houses of Parliament and provision 
shall be made by Parliament by law for the vacation by a person who is chosen a member of both Houses of 
his seat in one House or the other. 
(2) No person shall be a member both of Parliament and of a House of the Legislature of a State2***, and 
if a person is chosen a member both of Parliament and of a House of the Legislature of13[a State], then, at the 
expiration of such period as may be specified in rules4made by the President, that person‘s seat in Parliament 
shall become vacant, unless he has previously resigned his seat in the Legislature of the State. 
(3) If a member of either House of Parliament— 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in 5[clause (1) or clause (2) of article 
102], or 
6
 [(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case 
may be, and his resignation is accepted by the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be,] 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant: 
7
 [Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in sub-clause (b), if from information received or 
otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be,   
1. Cls. (3) and (4) were omitted by the Constitution  (Forty-second  Amendment)  Act,  1976,  s. 18 (date  of  enforcement  yet  to  be 
notified). 
2. The words and letters ―specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).  
3. Subs. by ibid., for ―such a State‖. 
4. See the Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950, published with the Ministry of Law notification No. F.46/50-C, 
dated the 26th January, 1950, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, P. 678. 
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 2, for ―clause (1) of article 102‖ (w.e.f. 1-3-1985). 
6. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-third Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-5-1974). 
7. Ins. by ibid. 
50 
is satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such resignation.] 
(4) If for a period of sixty days a member of either House of Parliament is without permission of the 
House absent from all meetings thereof, the House may declare his seat vacant: 
Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall be taken of any period during 
which the House is prorogued or is adjourned for more than four consecutive days. 
102. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and 
for being, a member of either House of Parliament— 
1
 [(a)  if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State, 
other than an office declared by Parliament by law not to disqualify its holder;] 
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; 
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent; 
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign State, oris 
under any acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State; 
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament. 
2
 [Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit 
under the Government of India or the Government of any State by reason only that he is a Minister either for 
the Union or for such State.] 
3
 [(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of either House of Parliament if he is so 
disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.] 
4
 [103. Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.—(1) If any question arises as to 
whether a member of either House of Parliament has become subject to any of the disqualifications 
mentioned in clause (1) of article 102, the question shall be referred for the decision of the President and his 
decision shall be final. 
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall obtain the opinion of the 
Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.] 
104. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation under article 99 or when not 
qualified or when disqualified.—If a person sits or votes as a member of either House of Parliament before 
he has complied with the requirements of article 99, or when he knows that he is not qualified or that he is 
disqualified for membership thereof, or that he is prohibited from so doing by the provisions of any law 
made by Parliament, he shall be liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a penalty of five 
hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the Union. 
Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its Members 
105. Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Parliament and of the members and committees 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 19 to read as ―(a) if he holds any such office of profit under the 
Government of India or the Government of any State as is declared by Parliament by law to disqualify its holder‖ (date of 
enforcement yet to be notified). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-Second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 3, for ―(2) For the purposes of this article‖ (w.e.f. 1-3-1985). 
3. Ins. by ibid. 
4. Art. 103 has been successively subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 20 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and the 
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 14to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
51 
thereof.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the rules and standing orders regulating 
the procedure of Parliament, there shall be freedom of speech in Parliament. 
(2) No member of Parliament shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any 
vote given by him in Parliament or any committee thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the 
publication by or under the authority of either House of Parliament of any report, paper, votes or proceedings. 
1
 [(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament, and of the 
members and the committees of each House, shall be such as may from time to time be defined by 
Parliament by law, and, until so defined, 2[shall be those of that House and of its members and committees 
immediately before the coming into force of section 15 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 
1978.]] 
(4) The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to persons who by virtue of this 
Constitution have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, a House of 
Parliament or any committee thereof as they apply in relation to members of Parliament. 
106. Salaries and allowances of members.—Members of either House of Parliament shall be entitled 
to receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined by Parliament by law and, 
until provision in that respect is so made, allowances at such rates and upon such conditions as were 
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution applicable in the case of members of the 
Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India. 
Legislative Procedure 
107. Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.—(1) Subject to the provisions of articles 109 
and 117 with respect to Money Bills and other financial Bills, a Bill may originate in either House of 
Parliament. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 108 and 109, a Bill shall not be deemed to have been passed by 
the Houses of Parliament unless it has been agreed to by both Houses, either without amendment or with 
such amendments only as are agreed to by both Houses. 
(3) A Bill pending in Parliament shall not lapse by reason of the prorogation of the Houses. 
(4) A Bill pending in the Council of States which has not been passed by the House of the People shall 
not lapse on a dissolution of the House of the People. 
(5) A Bill which is pending in the House of the People, or which having been passed by the House of the 
People is pending in the Council of States, shall, subject to the provisions of article 108, lapse on a 
dissolution of the House of the People. 
108. Joint sitting of both Houses in certain cases.—(1) If after a Bill has been passed by one House 
and transmitted to the other House— 
(a) the Bill is rejected by the other House; or 
(b) the Houses have finally disagreed as to the amendments to be made in the Bill; or 
(c) more than six months elapse from the date of the reception of the Bill by the other House without 
the Bill being passed by it, 
the President may, unless the Bill has elapsed by reason of a dissolution of the House of the People, notify  
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 21 to read as below:– ―(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament, and of the members and the committees 
of each House, shall be those of that House, and of its members and committees, at the commencement of sec. 21 of the 
Constitution (Forty-second) Amendment Act, 1976, and as may be evolved by such House of Parliament from time to time.‖ (date 
of enforcement yet to be notified). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 15 for certain words (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
52 
to the Houses by message if they are sitting or by public notification if they are not sitting, his intention to 
summon them to meet in a joint sitting for the purpose of deliberating and voting on the Bill: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to a Money Bill. 
(2) In reckoning any such period of six months as is referred to in clause (1), no account shall be taken 
of any period during which the House referred to in sub-clause (c) of that clause is prorogued or adjourned 
for more than four consecutive days. 
(3) Where the President has under clause (1) notified his intention of summoning the Houses to meet in a 
joint sitting, neither House shall proceed further with the Bill, but the President may at any time after the date 
of his notification summon the Houses to meet in a joint sitting for the purpose specified in the notification and, 
if he does so, the Houses shall meet accordingly. 
(4) If at the joint sitting of the two Houses the Bill, with such amendments, if any, as are agreed to in joint 
sitting, is passed by a majority of the total number of members of both Houses present and voting, it shall be 
deemed for the purposes of this Constitution to have been passed by both Houses: 
Provided that at a joint sitting— 
(a) if the Bill, having been passed by one House, has not been passed by the other House with 
amendments and returned to the House in which it originated, no amendment shall be proposed to the 
Bill other than such amendments (if any) as are made necessary by the delay in the passage of the Bill; 
(b) if the Bill has been so passed and returned, only such amendments as aforesaid shall be proposed to 
the Bill and such other amendments as are relevant to the matters with respect to which the Houses  have not 
agreed; 
and the decision of the person presiding as to the amendments which are admissible under this clause shall be final. 
(5) A joint sitting may be held under this article and a Bill passed thereat, notwithstanding that a 
dissolution of the House of the People has intervened since the President notified his intention to summon 
the Houses to meet therein. 
109. Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.—(1) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in the 
Council of States. 
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People it shall be transmitted to the Council 
of States for its recommendations and the Council of States shall within a period of fourteen days from the 
date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the People with its recommendations and the 
House of the People may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the Council 
of States. 
(3) If the House of the People accepts any of the recommendations of the Council of States, the Money 
Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the 
Council of States and accepted by the House of the People. 
(4) If the House of the People does not accept any of the recommendations of the Council of States, the 
Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the 
House of the People without any of the amendments recommended by the Council of States. 
(5) If a Money Bill passed by the House of the People and transmitted to the Council of States for its 
recommendations is not returned to the House of the People within the said period of fourteen days, it shall 
be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in which it 
was passed by the House of the People. 
110. Definition  of  ―Money Bills‖.—(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a 
Money Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
53 
(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax; 
(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by the Government of 
India, or the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be 
undertaken by the Government of India; 
(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of India, the payment of moneys 
into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such Fund; 
(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India; 
(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or 
the increasing of the amount of any such expenditure; 
(f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India or the public account of India 
or the custody or issue of such money or the audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State; or 
(g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f). 
(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it provides for the imposition of 
fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services 
rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any 
tax by any local authority or body for local purposes. 
(3) If any question arises whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not, the decision of the Speaker of the House 
of the People thereon shall be final. 
(4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted to the Council of States under 
article 109, and when it is presented to the President for assent under article 111, the certificate of the 
Speaker of the House of the People signed by him that it is a Money Bill. 
111. Assent to Bills.—When a Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament, it shall be presented to 
the President, and the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill, or that he withholds assent 
therefrom: 
Provided that the President may, as soon as possible after the presentation to him of a Bill for assent, 
return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill to the Houses with a message requesting that they will reconsider the 
Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any 
such amendments as he may recommend in his message, and when a Bill is so returned, the Houses shall 
reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the Houses with or without amendment and 
presented to the President for assent, the President shall not withhold assent therefrom. 
Procedure in Financial Matters 
112. Annual financial statement.—(1) The President shall in respect of every financial year cause to be 
laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Government of India for that year, in this Part referred to as the ―annual financial statement‖. 
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately— 
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Constitution as expenditure charged 
upon the Consolidated Fund of India; and 
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of 
India, 
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure. 
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of  India— 
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the President and other expenditure relating to his office; 
54 
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States 
and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People; 
(c) debt charges for which the Government of India is liable including interest, sinking fund charges 
and redemption charges, and other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and 
redemption of debt; 
(d) (i) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of the Supreme Court; 
(ii) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of the Federal Court; 
(iii) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of any High Court which exercises jurisdiction in 
relation to any area included in the territory of India or which at any time before the commencement of 
this Constitution exercised jurisdiction in relation to any area included in 1[a Governor's Province of the 
Dominion of India]; 
(e) the salary, allowances and pension payable to or in respect of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India; 
(f) any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal; 
(g) any other expenditure declared by this Constitution or by Parliament by law to be so charged. 
113. Procedure in Parliament with respect to estimates.—(1) So much of the estimates as relates to 
expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India shall not be submitted to the vote of Parliament, 
but nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the discussion in either House of Parliament of 
any of those estimates. 
(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be submitted in the form of 
demands for grants to the House of the People, and the House of the People shall have power to assent, or to 
refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand subject to a reduction of the amount specified 
therein. 
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation of the President. 
114. Appropriation Bills.—(1) As soon as may be after the grants under article 113 have been made by 
the House of the People, there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India of all moneys required to meet— 
(a) the grants so made by the House of the People; and 
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India but not exceeding in any case the 
amount shown in the statement previously laid before Parliament. 
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in either House of Parliament which will have the 
effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so made or of varying the amount of any 
expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, and the decision of the person presiding as to 
whether an amendment is inadmissible under this clause shall be final. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of articles 115 and 116, no money shall be withdrawn from the 
Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the 
provisions of this article. 
115. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.—(1) The President shall— 
(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the provisions of article 114 to   
be expended for a particular service for the current financial year is found to be insufficient for the 
purposes of that year or when a  need  has  arisen during  the current financial year for supplementary  or  
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.29 and Sch., for ―a Province corresponding to a State specified in 
Part A of the First Schedule‖ (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
55 
additional expenditure upon some new service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for 
that year, or 
(b) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year in excess of the amount 
granted for that service and for that year, 
cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament another statement showing the estimated amount of 
that expenditure or cause to be presented to the House of the People a demand for such excess, as the case  
may be. 
(2) The provisions of articles 112, 113 and 114 shall have effect in relation to any such statement and 
expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure or the grant in respect of such demand as they have 
effect in relation to the annual financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for 
a grant and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund 
of India to meet such expenditure or grant. 
116. Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the 
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the House of the People shall have power— 
(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial 
year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in article 113 for the voting of such grant and 
the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 114 in relation to that expenditure; 
(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of India when on account 
of the magnitude or the indefinite character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the details 
ordinarily given in an annual financial statement; 
(c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current service of any financial year; 
and Parliament shall have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund 
of India for the purposes for which the said grants are made. 
(2) The provisions of articles 113 and 114 shall have effect in relation to the making of any grant under 
clause (1) and to any law to be made under that clause as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant 
with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made for the 
authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure. 
117. Special provisions as to financial Bills.—(1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of 
the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved 
except on the recommendation of the President and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced in 
the Council of States: 
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for the moving of an amendment 
making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax. 
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters aforesaid by 
reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or 
payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, 
abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes. 
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India shall not be passed by either House of Parliament unless the President has 
recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill. 
Procedure Generally 
118. Rules of procedure.—(1) Each House of Parliament may make rules for regulating, subject to the 
56 
provisions of this Constitution, its procedure 1*** and the conduct of its business. 
(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of procedure and standing orders in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution with respect to the Legislature of the Dominion 
of India shall have effect in relation to Parliament subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be 
made therein by the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the case 
may be. 
(3) The President, after consultation with the Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker of the 
House of the People, may make rules as to the procedure with respect to joint sittings of, and 
communications between, the two Houses. 
(4) At a joint sitting of the two Houses the Speaker of the House of the People, or in his absence such 
person as may be determined by rules of procedure made under clause (3), shall preside. 
119. Regulation by law of procedure in Parliament in relation to financial business.—Parliament 
may, for the purpose of the timely completion of financial business, regulate by law the procedure of, and 
the conduct of business in, each House of Parliament in relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the 
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India, and, if and so far as any provision of any law 
so made is inconsistent with any rule made by a House of Parliament under clause (1) of article 118 or with 
any rule or standing order having effect in relation to Parliament under clause (2) of that article, such 
provision shall prevail. 
120. Language to be used in Parliament.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in  Part XVII, but subject to 
the provisions of article 348, business in Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English: 
Provided that the Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the House of the People, or person 
acting as such, as the case may be, may permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in Hindi 
or in English to address the House in his mother-tongue. 
(2) Unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, this article shall, after the expiration of a period of 
fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution, have effect as if the words ―or in English‖ were 
omitted therefrom. 
121. Restriction on discussion in Parliament.—No discussion shall take place in Parliament with 
respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties 
except upon a motion for presenting an address to the President praying for the removal of the Judge as 
hereinafter provided. 
122. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Parliament.—(1) The validity of any proceedings in 
Parliament shall not be called in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure. 
(2) No officer or member of Parliament in whom powers are vested by or under this Constitution for 
regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining order, in Parliament shall be subject to 
the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers. 
CHAPTER III.—LEGISLATIVE POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT 
123. Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Parliament.—(1) If at any time, 
except when both Houses of Parliament are in session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist 
which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the 
circumstances appear to him to require. 
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as an Act of 
Parliament, but every such Ordinance— 
1. The brackets and words ―(including the quorum to constitute a meeting of the House)‖ ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second 
Amendment) Act, 1976 (date of enforcement yet to be notified). 
57 
(a) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six 
weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, or, if before the expiration of that period resolutions 
disapproving it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the second of those resolutions; and 
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the President. 
Explanation.—Where the Houses of Parliament are summoned to reassemble on different dates, the 
period of six weeks shall be reckoned from the later of those dates for the purposes of this clause. 
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision which Parliament would not 
under this Constitution be competent to enact, it shall be void. 
1
 (4)*     
*                         
*                    
*                  
CHAPTER IV.—THE UNION JUDICIARY 
*                  
124. Establishment and constitution of Supreme Court.—(1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India 
consisting of a Chief Justice of India and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more 
than seven2other Judges. 
(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and 
seal 3[on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in article 
124A] and shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years: 
4[*   
5
 *                
[Provided that]—               
*   
*  
*] 
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office; 
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office in the manner provided in clause (4). 
(2A) The age of a Judge of the Supreme Court shall be determined by such authority and in such manner 
as Parliament may by law provide. 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court unless he is a 
citizen of India and— 
(a) has been for at least five years a Judge of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in 
succession; or 
(b) has been for at least ten years an advocate of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in 
succession; or 
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, a distinguished jurist. 
Explanation I.—In this clause ―High Court‖ means a High Court which exercises, or which at any time 
before the commencement of this Constitution exercised, jurisdiction in any part of the territory of India. 
1. Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 2 (with retrospective effect) and omitted by the 
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 16 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
2. Now ―thirty-three‖, vide the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment  Act, 2019 (37 of  2019), s. 2 (w.e.f. 9-8-2019). 
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 2, for ―after consultation with such of the Judges of the 
Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem necessary for that purpose‖ (w.e.f.  13-4-2015). 
This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme Court vide its order dated the 16th October, 2015 in the Supreme Court 
Advocates-on-Record Association and Another Vs. Union of India reported in AIR 2016 SC 117. 
4. Proviso omitted by ibid. This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme Court order dated the 16th October, 2015 in the 
Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association Vs. Union of India reported in AIR 2016 SC 117. 
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 2, for the words ―Provided further that‖ (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). 
This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme Court vide its order dated 16th October, 2015 in the Supreme Court 
Advocates-on-Record Association and Another Vs. Union of India reported in AIR 2016 SC 117. 
58 
Explanation II.—In computing for the purpose of this clause the period during which a person has been 
an advocate, any period during which a person has held judicial office not inferior to that of a district judge 
after he became an advocate shall be included. 
(4) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office except by an order of the 
President passed after an address by each House of Parliament supported by a majority of the total 
membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House 
present and voting has been presented to the President in the same session for such removal on the ground of 
proved misbehaviour or incapacity. 
(5) Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the presentation of an address and for the 
investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge under clause (4). 
(6) Every person appointed to be a Judge of the Supreme Court shall, before he enters upon his office, 
make and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or 
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule. 
(7) No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court shall plead or act in any court or 
before any authority within the territory of India. 
1
 [124A. National Judicial Appointments Commission.—(1) There shall be a Commission to be known 
as the National Judicial Appointments Commission consisting of the following, namely:—  
(a) the Chief Justice of India, Chairperson, ex officio; 
(b) two other senior Judges of the Supreme Court next to the Chief Justice of India––Members, ex 
officio; 
(c) the Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice––Member, ex officio; 
(d) two eminent persons to be nominated by the committee consisting of the Prime Minister, the 
Chief Justice of India and the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People or where there is no such 
Leader of Opposition, then, the Leader of single largest Opposition Party in the House of the People–
Members: 
Provided that one of the eminent person shall be nominated from amongst the persons belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, Minorities or Women: 
Provided further that an eminent person shall be nominated for a period of three years and shall not  
be eligible for renomination. 
(2) No act or proceedings of the National Judicial Appointments Commission shall be questioned or be 
invalidated merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the 
Commission. 
124B.Functions of Commission.––It shall be the duty of the National Judicial Appointments 
Commission to— 
(a) recommend persons for appointment as Chief Justice of India, Judges of the Supreme Court, 
Chief Justices of High Courts and other Judges of High Courts; 
(b) recommend transfer of Chief Justices and other Judges of High Courts from one High Court to 
any other High Court; and 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 3 (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has been struck down by 
the Supreme Court vide its order dated the 16th October, 2015 in the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and Another 
Vs. Union of India reported in AIR 2016 SC 117. 
59 
(c) ensure that the person recommended is of ability and integrity. 
124C. Power of Parliament to make law.––Parliament may, by law, regulate the procedure for the 
appointment of Chief Justice of India and other Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices and other 
Judges of High Courts and empower the Commission to lay down by regulations the procedure for the 
discharge of its functions, the manner of selection of persons for appointment and such other matters as may 
be considered necessary by it.] 
125. Salaries, etc., of Judges.—1[(1) There shall be paid to the Judges of the Supreme Court such 
salaries as may be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such 
salaries as are specified in the Second Schedule.] 
(2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such privileges and allowances and to such rights in respect of leave 
of absence and pension as may from time to time be determined by or under law made by Parliament and, 
until so determined, to such privileges, allowances and rights as are specified in the Second Schedule: 
Provided that neither the privileges nor the allowances of a Judge nor his rights in respect of leave of 
absence or pension shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. 
126. Appointment of acting Chief Justice.—When the office of Chief Justice of India is vacant or 
when the Chief Justice is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, the 
duties of the office shall be performed by such one of the other Judges of the Court as the President may 
appoint for the purpose. 
127. Appointment of ad hoc Judges.—(1) If at any time there should not be a quorum of the Judges of 
the Supreme Court available to hold or continue any session of the Court, 2[the National Judicial 
Appointments Commission on a reference made to it by the Chief Justice of India, may with the previous 
consent of the President] and after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned, request 
in writing the attendance at the sittings of the Court, as an ad hoc Judge, for such period as may be 
necessary, of a Judge of a High Court duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court to be 
designated by the Chief Justice of India. 
(2) It shall be the duty of the Judge who has been so designated, in priority to other duties of his office, 
to attend the sittings of the Supreme Court at the time and for the period for which his attendance is required, 
and while so attending he shall have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges, and shall discharge the 
duties, of a Judge of the Supreme Court. 
128. Attendance of retired Judges at sittings of the Supreme  Court.—Notwithstanding anything in 
this Chapter, 3[the National Judicial Appointments Commission] may at any time, with the previous consent 
of the President, request any person who has held the office of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of the 
Federal Court 4[or who has held the office of a Judge of a High Court and is duly qualified for appointment 
as a Judge of the Supreme Court] to sit and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court, and every such person so 
requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such allowances as the President may by order 
determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, but shall not otherwise be deemed to be, a 
Judge of that Court: 
1  Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 2, for ―clause (1)‖ (w.e.f. 1-4-1986). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 4, for ―the Chief Justice of India may, with the previous 
consent of the President‖ (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme Court vide its order dated the 
16th October, 2015 in the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and Another Vs. Union of India reported in AIR 2016 
SC 117. 
3. Subs. by ibid., s. 5, for ―the Chief Justice of India‖ (w.e.f.  13-4-2015). This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme 
Court vide its order dated the 16th October, 2015 in the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and Another Vs. Union of 
India reported in AIR 2016 SC 117. 
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 3 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963). 
60 
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require any such person as aforesaid to sit and act 
as a Judge of that Court unless he consents so to do.  
129. Supreme Court to be a court of record.—The Supreme Court shall be a court of record and shall 
have all the powers of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself. 
130. Seat of Supreme Court.—The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as 
the Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint. 
131. Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the 
Supreme Court shall, to the exclusion of any other court, have original jurisdiction in any dispute— 
(a) between the Government of India and one or more States; or 
(b) between the Government of India and any State or States on one side and one or more other 
States on the other; or 
(c) between two or more States, 
if and in so far as the dispute involves any question (whether of law or fact) on which the existence or extent of a 
legal right depends: 
1
 [Provided that the said jurisdiction shall not extend to a dispute arising out of any treaty, agreement, 
covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument which, having been entered into or executed before 
the commencement of this Constitution, continues in operation after such commencement, or which provides 
that the said jurisdiction shall not extend to such a dispute.] 
2
 [131A. Exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to questions as to constitutional validity 
of Central laws.].–Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 4 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 
132. Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts in certain cases.—(1) 
An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order of a High Court in the 
territory of India, whether in a civil, criminal or other proceeding, 3[if the High Court certifies under article 
134A] that the case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution. 
4
 *                       
*                       
*                    
*          
* 
(3) Where such a certificate is given,5*** any party in the case may appeal to the Supreme Court on the 
ground that any such question as aforesaid has been wrongly decided5***. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, the expression ―final order‖ includes an order deciding an 
issue which, if decided in favour of the appellant, would be sufficient for the final disposal of the case. 
133. Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in appeals from High Courts in regard to civil 
matters.—6[(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order in a civil 
proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India 7[if the High Court certifies under article 134A—] 
(a) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance; and 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 5, for the proviso (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 17, for ―if the High Court certifies‖ (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 
4. Cl. (2) omitted by ibid. 
5. Certain words omitted by ibid. 
6. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirtieth Amendment) Act, 1972, s. 2, for cl. (1) (w.e.f. 27-2-1973).  
7. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 18, for ―if the High Court certifies‖ (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 
61 
(b) that in the opinion of the High Court the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme 
Court.] 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in article 132, any party appealing to the Supreme Court under clause (1) 
may urge as one of the grounds in such appeal that a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of 
this Constitution has been wrongly decided. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, no appeal shall, unless Parliament by law otherwise 
provides, lie to the Supreme Court from the judgment, decree or final order of one Judge of a High Court. 
134. Appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in regard to criminal matters.—(1) An appeal shall 
lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High 
Court in the territory of India if the High Court— 
(a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to death; or  
(b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court subordinate to its authority and has 
in such trial convicted the accused person and sentenced him to death; or  
(c) 1[certifies under article 134A] that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court: 
Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) shall lie subject to such provisions as may be made in that 
behalf under clause (1) of article 145 and to such conditions as the High Court may establish or require. 
(2) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any further powers to entertain and hear appeals 
from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India 
subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in such law. 
2
 [134A. Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court.—Every High Court, passing or making a 
judgment, decree, final order, or sentence, referred to in clause (1) of article 132 or clause (1) of article 133, or 
clause (1) of article 134,— 
(a) may, if it deems fit so to do, on its own motion; and  
(b) shall, if an oral application is made, by or on behalf of the party aggrieved, immediately after the 
passing or making of such judgment, decree, final order or sentence, 
determine, as soon as may be after such passing or making, the question whether a certificate of the nature 
referred to in clause (1) of article 132, or clause (1) of article 133 or, as the case may be, sub-clause (c) of 
clause (1) of article 134, may be given in respect of that case.]  
135. Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing law to be exercisable by the 
Supreme Court.—Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the Supreme Court shall also have 
jurisdiction and powers with respect to any matter to which the provisions of article 133 or article 134 do not 
apply if jurisdiction and powers in relation to that matter were exercisable by the Federal Court immediately 
before the commencement of this Constitution under any existing law. 
136. Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, 
the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, decree, 
determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the 
territory of India. 
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any judgment, determination, sentence or order passed or made 
by any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces. 
137. Review of judgments or orders by the Supreme Court.—Subject to the provisions of any law 
made by Parliament or any rules made under article 145, the Supreme Court shall have power to review any 
judgment pronounced or order made by it. 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 19, for ―certifies‖(w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 
2. Ins. by ibid., s. 20. 
62 
138. Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.—(1) The Supreme Court shall have such 
further jurisdiction and powers with respect to any of the matters in the Union List as Parliament may by law 
confer. 
(2) The Supreme Court shall have such further jurisdiction and powers with respect to any matter as the 
Government of India and the Government of any State may by special agreement confer, if Parliament by 
law provides for the exercise of such jurisdiction and powers by the Supreme Court. 
139. Conferment on the Supreme Court of powers to issue certain writs.—Parliament may by law 
confer on the Supreme Court power to issue directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of 
habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for any purposes other 
than those mentioned in clause (2) of article 32. 
1
 [139A. Transfer of certain cases.—2[(1) Where cases involving the same or substantially the same 
questions of law are pending before the Supreme Court and one or more High Courts or before two or more 
High Courts and the Supreme Court is satisfied on its own motion or on an application made by the 
Attorney-General of India or by a party to any such case that such questions are substantial questions of 
general importance, the Supreme Court may withdraw the case or cases pending before the High Court or the 
High Courts and dispose of all the cases itself: 
Provided that the Supreme Court may after determining the said questions of law return any case so 
withdrawn together with a copy of its judgment on such questions to the High Court from which the case has 
been withdrawn, and the High Court shall on receipt thereof, proceed to dispose of the case in conformity 
with such judgment.] 
(2) The Supreme Court may, if it deems it expedient so to do for the ends of justice, transfer any case, 
appeal or other proceedings pending before any High Court to any other High Court.] 
140. Ancillary powers of Supreme Court.—Parliament may by law make provision for conferring 
upon the Supreme Court such supplemental powers not inconsistent with any of the provisions of this 
Constitution as may appear to be necessary or desirable for the purpose of enabling the Court more 
effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by or under this Constitution. 
141. Law declared by Supreme Court to be binding on all courts.—The law declared by the Supreme 
Court shall be binding on all courts within the territory of India. 
142. Enforcement of decrees and orders of Supreme Court and orders as to discovery, etc.—(1) 
The Supreme Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction may pass such decree or make such order as is 
necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or matter pending before it, and any decree so passed or 
order so made shall be enforceable throughout the territory of India in such manner as may be prescribed by 
or under any law made by Parliament and, until provision in that behalf is so made, in such manner as the 
President may by order3 prescribe. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Supreme Court shall, as 
respects the whole of the territory of India, have all and every power to make any order for the purpose of 
securing the attendance of any person, the discovery or production of any documents, or the investigation or 
punishment of any contempt of itself. 
143. Power of President to consult Supreme Court.—(1) If at any time it appears to the President that 
a question of law or fact has arisen, or is likely to arise, which is of such a nature and of such public 
importance that it is expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court upon it, he may refer the question 
to that Court for consideration and the Court may, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its 
opinion thereon. 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).  
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 21, for cl. (1) (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 
3. See the Supreme Court (Decrees and Orders) Enforcement Order, 1954 (C.O. 47). 
63 
(2) The President may, notwithstanding anything in 1*** the proviso to article 131, refer a dispute of the 
kind mentioned in the 2[said proviso] to the Supreme Court for opinion and the Supreme Court shall, after 
such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its opinion thereon. 
144. Civil and judicial authorities to act in aid of the Supreme Court.—All authorities, civil and 
judicial, in the territory of India shall act in aid of the Supreme Court. 
3
 [144A. Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to constitutional validity of laws.]
Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 5 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 
145. Rules of Court, etc.—(1) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the Supreme 
Court may from time to time, with the approval of the President, make rules for regulating generally the 
practice and procedure of the Court including— 
(a) rules as to the persons practising before the Court; 
(b) rules as to the procedure for hearing appeals and other matters pertaining to appeals including  
the time within which appeals to the Court are to be entered; 
(c) rules as to the proceedings in the Court for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by     
Part III; 
4
 [(cc) rules as to the proceedings in the Court under 5[article 139A];] 
(d) rules as to the entertainment of appeals under sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of article 134; 
(e) rules as to the conditions subject to which any judgment pronounced or order made by the Court 
may be reviewed and the procedure for such review including the time within which applications to the 
Court for such review are to be entered; 
(f) rules as to the costs of and incidental to any proceedings in the Court and as to the fees to be 
charged in respect of proceedings therein; 
(g) rules as to the granting of bail; 
(h) rules as to stay of proceedings; 
(i) rules providing for the summary determination of any appeal which appears to the Court to be 
frivolous or vexatious or brought for the purpose of delay; 
(j) rules as to the procedure for inquiries referred to in clause (1) of article 317. 
(2) Subject to the 6[provisions of 7*** clause (3)], rules made under this article may fix the minimum 
number of Judges who are to sit for any purpose, and may provide for the powers of single Judges and 
Division Courts. 
(3) 8[4***The minimum number] of Judges who are to sit for the purpose of deciding any case involving 
involving a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution or for the purpose of 
hearing any reference under article 143 shall be five: 
Provided that, where the Court hearing an appeal under any of the provisions of this Chapter other than 
article 132 consists of less than five Judges and in the course of the hearing of the appeal the Court is 
1. The words, brackets and figure  ―clause (i) of‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Subs. by ibid., for ―said clause‖.  
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 25 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
4. Ins by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).  
5. Subs.by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 6, for ―articles 131A and 139A‖(w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 
6. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26, for the words ―provisions of clause (3)‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 
7. Certain words omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 6 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 
8. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26, for ―The minimum number‖ (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 