this Chapter,1[the National Judicial Appointments Commission on a reference made to it by the Chief Justice 
of a High Court for any State, may with the previous consent of the President], request any person who has 
held the office of a Judge of that Court or of any other High Court to sit and act as a Judge of the High Court 
for that State, and every such person so requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such 
allowances as the President may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, 
but shall not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that High Court: 
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require any such person as aforesaid to sit and act 
as a Judge of that High Court unless he consents so to do.] 
225. Jurisdiction of existing High Courts.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the 
provisions of any law of the appropriate Legislature made by virtue of powers conferred on that Legislature 
by this Constitution, the jurisdiction of, and the law administered in, any existing High Court, and the 
respective powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the administration of justice in the Court, including any 
power to make rules of Court and to regulate the sittings of the Court and of members thereof sitting alone or 
in Division Courts, shall be the same as immediately before the commencement of this Constitution: 
2
 [Provided that any restriction to which the exercise of original jurisdiction by any of the High Courts 
with respect to any matter concerning the revenue or concerning any act ordered or done in the collection 
thereof was subject immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall no longer apply to the 
exercise of such jurisdiction.] 
3
 [226. Power of High Courts to issue certain writs.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in article 324***, 
every High Court shall have power, throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to 
issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate cases, any Government, within those territories 
directions, orders or 5[writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo 
warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for 
any other purpose.] 
(2) The power conferred by clause (1) to issue directions, orders or writs to any Government, authority 
or person may also be exercised by any High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the territories within 
which the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises for the exercise of such power, notwithstanding that the 
seat of such Government or authority or the residence of such person is not within those territories. 
6
 [(3) Where any party against whom an interim order, whether by way of injunction or stay or in any 
other manner, is made on, or in any proceedings relating to, a petition under clause (1), without— 
(a) furnishing to such party copies of such petition and all documents in support of the plea for such 
interim order; and 
(b) giving such party an opportunity of being heard, 
makes an application to the High Court for the vacation of such order and furnishes a copy of such application 
to  the  party in whose favour  such  order  has  been  made  or  the  counsel of such  party, the High Court shall  
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 9, for ―the Chief Justice of a High Court for any State may at 
anytime, with the previous consent of the President‖  (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme 
Court vide its order dated the 16th October, 2015 in the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and Another Vs. Union 
of India reported in AIR 2016 SC 117. 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 29 (w.e.f. 20-6.1979). Original Proviso was omitted by the 
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 37 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 38 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 
4. The words, figures and letters ―but subject to the provisions of article 131A and article 226A‖ omitted by the Constitution (Forty
third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 7 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 30 for the portion beginning with the words ―writs in the nature 
of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them‖ and ending with the words ―such illegality 
has resulted in substantial failure of justice‖ (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 
6. Subs. by ibid., s. 30, for clauses (3), (4), (5) and (6). 
87 
dispose of the application within a period of two weeks from the date on which it is received or from the date 
on which the copy of such application is so furnished, whichever is later, or where the High Court is closed on 
the last day of that period, before the expiry of the next day afterwards on which the High Court is open; and if 
the application is not so disposed of, the interim order shall, on the expiry of that period, or, as the case may be, 
the expiry of the said next day, stand vacated.] 
1
 [(4)] The power conferred on a High Court by this article shall not be in derogation of the power conferred 
on the Supreme Court by clause (2) of article 32.] 
2
 [226A. Constitutional validity of Central laws not to be considered in proceedings under article 226.] 
227. Power of superintendence over all courts by the High Court.—3[(1) Every High Court shall 
have superintendence over all courts and tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises 
jurisdiction.] 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the High Court may— 
(a) call for returns from such courts; 
(b) make and issue general rules and prescribe forms for regulating the practice and proceedings of 
such courts; and 
(c) prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept by the officers of any such 
courts. 
(3) The High Court may also settle tables of fees to be allowed to the sheriff and all clerks and officers 
of such courts and to attorneys, advocates and pleaders practising therein: 
Provided that any rules made, forms prescribed or tables settled under clause (2) or clause (3) shall not 
be inconsistent with the provision of any law for the time being in force, and shall require the previous 
approval of the Governor. 
(4) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to confer on a High Court powers of superintendence over 
any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces. 
4
 (5)*                
*          
*             
*    
*  
228. Transfer of certain cases to High Court.—If the High Court is satisfied that a case pending in a 
court subordinate to it involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution the 
determination of which is necessary for the disposal of the case, 5[it shall withdraw the case and 6*** may—] 
(a) either dispose of the case itself, or 
(b) determine the said question of law and return the case to the court from which the case has been 
so withdrawn together with a copy of its judgment on such question, and the said court shall on receipt 
thereof proceed to dispose of the case in conformity with such judgment. 
1. Cl. (7) renumbered as cl. (4) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 30 (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 39 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 
3. Cl. (1) has been successively subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 40 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and the 
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 31 to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
4. Cl. (5) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 40 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and omitted by the Constitution 
(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 31 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).  
5 . Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 41, for ―it shall withdraw the case and may—‖                 
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977).  
6. The words, figures and letter ―subject to the provisions of article 131A,‖omittedby the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 
1977, s. 9 (w.e.f.13-4-1978). 
88 
1
 [228A. Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to constitutional validity of State laws.]
Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 10 (w.e.f.13-4-1978). 
229. Officers and servants and the expenses of High Courts.—(1)  Appointments of officers and 
servants of a High Court shall be made by the Chief Justice of the Court or such other Judge or officer of the 
Court as he may direct: 
Provided that the Governor of the State 2*** may by rule require that in such cases as may be specified 
in the rule no person not already attached to the Court shall be appointed to any office connected with the 
Court save after consultation with the State Public Service Commission. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the Legislature of the State, the conditions of service of 
officers and servants of a High Court shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Chief Justice 
of the Court or by some other Judge or officer of the Court authorised by the Chief Justice to make rules for 
the purpose: 
Provided that the rules made under this clause shall, so far as they relate to salaries, allowances, leave or 
pensions, require the approval of the Governor of the State2***. 
(3) The administrative expenses of a High Court, including all salaries, allowances and pensions payable 
to or in respect of the officers and servants of the Court, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the 
State, and any fees or other moneys taken by the Court shall form part of that Fund. 
3
 [230. Extension of jurisdiction of High Courts to Union territories.—(1) Parliament may by law 
extend the jurisdiction of a High Court to, or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union 
territory. 
(2) Where the High Court of a State exercises jurisdiction in relation to a Union territory,— 
(a) nothing in this Constitution shall be construed as empowering the Legislature of the State to 
increase, restrict or abolish that jurisdiction; and 
(b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in relation to any rules, forms or tables for 
subordinate courts in that territory, be construed as a reference to the President. 
231. Establishment of a common High Court for two or more States.—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the preceding provisions of this Chapter, Parliament may by law establish a common High 
Court for two or more States or for two or more States and a Union territory. 
(2) In relation to any such High Court,— 
4[*  
*  
*    
*              
          *] 
(b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in relation to any rules, forms or tables for 
subordinate courts, be construed as a reference to the Governor of the State in which the subordinate 
courts are situate; and 
(c) the references in articles 219 and 229 to the State shall be construed as a reference to the State in 
which the High Court has its principal seat: 
1.Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 42 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).  
2. The words ―in which the High Court has its principle seat‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and 
Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 16, for arts. 230, 231 and 232 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
4. Sub-clause (a) omitted by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 10  (w.e.f.13-4-2015). This amendment has 
been struck down by the Supreme Court vide its order dated the 16th October, 2015 in the Supreme Court Advocates’ on Record 
Association and Another Vs. Union of India reported in AIR 2016 SC 117. Before Amendment Sub-clause (a) was as under:– ―(a) the reference in article 217 to the Governor of the State shall be construed as to the reference to the Governors of all the 
State‘s in relation to which the High Court exercises jurisdiction.‖. 
89 
Provided that if such principal seat is in a Union territory, the references in articles 219 and 229 to 
the Governor, Public Service Commission, Legislature and Consolidated Fund of the State shall be 
construed respectively as references to the President, Union Public Service Commission, Parliament and 
Consolidated Fund of India.] 
[232. Interpretation.-Articles 230, 231 and 232 substituted with articles 230 and 231 by the Constitution 
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).] 
CHAPTER VI.—SUBORDINATE  COURTS 
233.  Appointment of district judges.—(1) Appointments of persons to be, and the posting and 
promotion of, district judges in any State shall be made by the Governor of the State in consultation with the 
High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State. 
(2) A person not already in the service of the Union or of the State shall only be eligible to be appointed 
a district judge if he has been for not less than seven years an advocate or a pleader and is recommended by 
the High Court for appointment. 
1
 [233A. Validation  of  appointments  of,  and  judgments,  etc.,  delivered  by,  certain district  
judges.—Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court,— 
(a) (i) no appointment of any person already in the judicial service of a State or of any person who 
has been for not less than seven years an advocate or a pleader, to be a district judge in that State, and 
(ii) no posting, promotion or transfer of any such person as a district judge,  
made at any time before the commencement of the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966, otherwise 
than in accordance with the provisions of article 233 or article 235 shall be deemed to be illegal or void or ever 
to have become illegal or void by reason only of the fact that such appointment, posting, promotion or transfer 
was not made in accordance with the said provisions; 
(b) no jurisdiction exercised, no judgment, decree, sentence or order passed or made, and no other 
act or proceeding done or taken, before the commencement of the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) 
Act, 1966 by, or before, any person appointed, posted, promoted or transferred as a district judge in any 
State otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of article 233 or article 235 shall be deemed to be 
illegal or invalid or ever to have become illegal or invalid by reason only of the fact that such 
appointment, posting, promotion or transfer was not made in accordance with the said provisions.] 
234. Recruitment of persons other than district judges to the judicial service.—Appointments of persons 
other than district judges to the judicial service of a State shall be made by the Governor of the State in 
accordance with rules made by him in that behalf after consultation with the State Public Service Commission and 
with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State. 
235. Control over subordinate courts.—The control over district courts and courts subordinate thereto 
including the posting and promotion of, and the grant of leave to, persons belonging to the judicial service of 
a State and holding any post inferior to the post of district judge shall be vested in the High Court, but 
nothing in this article shall be construed as taking away from any such person any right of appeal which he 
may have under the law regulating the conditions of his service or as authorising the High Court to deal with 
him otherwise than in accordance with the conditions of his service prescribed under such law. 
236. Interpretation.—In this Chapter— 
(a) the expression ―district judge‖ includes judge of a city civil court, additional district judge, joint 
district judge, assistant district judge, chief judge of a small cause court, chief presidency magistrate, 
additional chief presidency magistrate, sessions judge, additional sessions judge and assistant sessions 
Judge; 
(b) the expression ―judicial service‖ means a service consisting exclusively of persons intended to 
fill the post of district judge and other civil judicial posts inferior to the post of district judge. 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22-12-1966). 
90 
237. Application  of the provisions of  this Chapter to certain class or classes of magistrates.—The 
Governor may by public notification direct that the foregoing provisions of this Chapter and any rules made 
thereunder shall with effect from such date as may be fixed by him in that behalf apply in relation to any 
class or classes of magistrates in the State as they apply in relation to persons appointed to the judicial 
service of the State subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the notification. 
PART VII.—[The States in Part B of the First Schedule].Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
238. [Application of provisions of Part VI to States in Part B of the First Schedule.]–Omitted by the 
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
PART VIII 
1
 [THE UNION TERRITORIES] 
2
 [239. Administration of Union territories.—(1) Save as otherwise provided by Parliament by law, 
every Union territory shall be administered by the President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit, through an 
administrator to be appointed by him with such designation as he may specify. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Part VI, the President may appoint the Governor of a State as 
the administrator of an adjoining Union territory, and where a Governor is so appointed, he shall exercise his 
functions as such administrator independently of his Council of Ministers.] 
3
 [239A. Creation of local Legislatures or Council of Ministers or both for certain Union 
territories.—(1) Parliament may by law create 4[for the Union territory of 5[Puducherry—]] 
(a) a body, whether elected or partly nominated and partly elected, to function as a Legislature for 
the Union territory, or 
(b) a Council of Ministers, 
or both with such constitution, powers and functions, in each case, as may be specified in the law. 
(2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) shall not be deemed to be an amendment of this 
Constitution for the purposes of article 368 notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or 
has the effect of amending this Constitution.] 
6
 [239AA. Special provisions with respect to Delhi.—(1) As from the date of commencement of the 
Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991, the Union territory of Delhi shall be called the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi (hereafter in this Part referred to as the National Capital Territory) and the 
administrator thereof appointed under article 239 shall be designated as the Lieutenant Governor. 
(2) (a) There shall be a Legislative Assembly for the National Capital Territory and the seats in such 
Assembly shall be filled by members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the National 
Capital Territory. 
(b)The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly, the number of seats reserved for Scheduled 
Castes, the division of the National Capital Territory into territorial constituencies (including the basis for 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 17, for the heading ―THE STATES IN PART C OF THE FIRST 
SCHEDULE‖ (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Subs. by ibid., for arts. 239 and 240. 
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 4 (w.e.f. 28-12-1962). 
4. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987) s. 63, for ― for any of the Union territories of Goa, 
Daman and Diu and Pondicherry‖ (w.e.f. 30-5-1987). 
5. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for ―Pondicherry‖ (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).  
6. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-2-1992).   
91 
such division) and all other matters relating to the functioning of the Legislative Assembly shall be regulated 
by law made by Parliament. 
(c) The provisions of articles 324 to 327 and 329 shall apply in relation to the National Capital Territory, 
the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory and the members thereof as they apply, in relation 
to a State, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the members thereof respectively; and any reference in 
articles 326 and 329 to ―appropriate Legislature‖ shall be deemed to be a reference to Parliament. 
(3) (a)Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislative Assembly shall have power to make 
laws for the whole or any part of the National Capital Territory with respect to any of the matters 
enumerated in the State List or in the Concurrent List in so far as any such matter is applicable to Union 
territories except matters with respect to Entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State List and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of 
that List in so far as they relate to the said Entries 1, 2 and 18. 
(b) Nothing in sub-clause (a)shall derogate from the powers of Parliament under this Constitution to 
make laws with respect to any matter for a Union territory or any part thereof. 
(c) If any provision of a law made by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any matter is repugnant 
to any provision of a law made by Parliament with respect to that matter, whether passed before or after the 
law made by the Legislative Assembly, or of an earlier law, other than a law made by the Legislative 
Assembly, then, in either case, the law made by Parliament, or, as the case may be, such earlier law, shall 
prevail and the law made by the Legislative Assembly shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void: 
Provided that if any such law made by the Legislative Assembly has been reserved for the consideration 
of the President and has received his assent, such law shall prevail in the National Capital Territory:  
Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall prevent Parliament from enacting at any time any 
law with respect to the same matter including a law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so 
made by the Legislative Assembly. 
(4) There shall be a Council of Ministers consisting of not more than ten per cent. of the total number of 
members in the Legislative Assembly, with the Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the Lieutenant 
Governor in the exercise of his functions in relation to matters with respect to which the Legislative 
Assembly has power to make laws, except in so far as he is, by or under any law, required to act in his 
discretion: 
Provided that in the case of difference of opinion between the Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers on 
any matter, the Lieutenant Governor shall refer it to the President for decision and act according to the 
decision given thereon by the President and pending such decision it shall be competent for the Lieutenant 
Governor in any case where the matter, in his opinion, is so urgent that it is necessary for him to take 
immediate action, to take such action or to give such direction in the matter as he deems necessary. 
(5) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the President and other Ministers shall be appointed by the 
President on the advice of the Chief Minister and the Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
President. 
(6) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly. 
1
 [(7) (a)] Parliament may, by law, make provisions for giving effect to, or supplementing the provisions 
contained in the foregoing clauses and for all matters incidental or consequential thereto. 
2
 [(b)Any such law as is referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not be deemed to be an amendment of this 
Constitution for the purposes of article 368 notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or 
has the effect of amending, this Constitution.] 
(8) The provisions of article 239B shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the National Capital 
Territory, the Lieutenant Governor and the Legislative Assembly, as they apply in relation to the Union 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventieth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3, for ―(7)‖ (w.e.f. 21-12-1991).  
2. Subs. by ibid.  
92 
territory of 1[Puducherry], the administrator and its Legislature, respectively; and any reference in that article 
to ―clause (1) of article 239A‖ shall be deemed to be a reference to this article or article 239AB, as the case 
may be. 
239AB. Provision in case of failure of constitutional machinery.—If the President, on receipt of a 
report from the Lieutenant Governor or otherwise, is satisfied— 
(a) that a situation has arisen in which the administration of the National Capital Territory cannot be 
carried on in accordance with the provisions of article 239AA or of any law made in pursuance of that 
article; or 
(b) that for the proper administration of the National Capital Territory it is necessary or expedient so 
to do, 
the President may by order suspend the operation of any provision of article 239AA or of all or any of the 
provisions of any law made in pursuance of that article for such period and subject to such conditions as may 
be specified in such law and make such incidental and consequential provisions as may appear to him to be 
necessary or expedient for administering the National Capital Territory in accordance with the provisions of 
article 239 and article 239AA.] 
2
 [239B. Power of administrator to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Legislature.—(1) If at 
any time, except when the Legislature of 3[the Union territory of 4[Puducherry]] is in session, the 
administrator thereof is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take 
immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require: 
Provided that no such Ordinance shall be promulgated by the administrator except after obtaining 
instructions from the President in that behalf: 
Provided further that whenever the said Legislature is dissolved, or its functioning remains suspended on 
account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, the 
administrator shall not promulgate any Ordinance during the period of such dissolution or suspension. 
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article in pursuance of instructions from the President shall be 
deemed to be an Act of the Legislature of the Union  territory which has been duly enacted after complying 
with the provisions in that behalf contained in any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, but 
every such Ordinance— 
(a) shall be laid before the Legislature of the Union territory and shall cease to operate at the 
expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature or if, before the expiration of that period, 
a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislature, upon the passing of the resolution; and 
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the administrator after obtaining instructions from the 
President in that behalf. 
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision which would not be valid if 
enacted in an Act of the Legislature of the Union territory made after complying with the provisions in that 
behalf contained in any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, it shall be void.] 
5
 *   
*                  
*              
*                              
*  
240. Power of President to make regulations for certain Union territories.—(1) The President may 
make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of the Union territory of— 
(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands; 
1. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for ―Pondicherry‖ (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).  
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30-12-1971). 
3. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987) s. 63, for ―for any of the Union territory referred to in 
clause (1) article 239A‖ (w.e.f. 30-5-1987). 
4. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for ―Pondicherry‖ (w.e.f. 1-10-2006). 
5. Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 4(retrospectively) and omitted by the Constitution 
(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 32 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
93 
1
 [(b) Lakshadweep;] 
2
 [(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu;] 
3
 [(d) ***;] 
4
 [(e) 5[Puducherry];] 
6
 (f) *** 
7
 (g) ***  
8
 9
 [Provided that when anybody is created under article 239A to function as a Legislature for the 
[Union territory of 10[Puducherry]], the President shall not make any regulation for the peace, progress 
and good government of that Union territory with effect from the date appointed for the first meeting of 
the Legislature:] 
11[Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legislature for the Union territory of 
Puducherry is dissolved, or the functioning of that body as such Legislature remains suspended on 
account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, the 
President may, during the period of such dissolution or suspension, make regulations for the peace, 
progress and good government of that Union territory.] 
(2) Any regulation so made may repeal or amend any Act made by Parliament or 12[any other law], 
which is for the time being applicable to the Union territory and, when promulgated by the President, shall 
have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament which applies to that territory.] 
241. High Courts for Union territories—(1) Parliament may by law constitute a High Court for a 
13[Union territory] or declare any court in any 14[such territory] to be a High Court for all or any of the 
purposes of this Constitution. 
(2) The provisions of Chapter V of Part VI shall apply in relation to every High Court referred to in 
clause (1) as they apply in relation to a High Court referred to in article 214 subject to such modifications or 
exceptions as Parliament may by law provide. 
15[(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the provisions of any law of the appropriate 
Legislature made by virtue of powers conferred on that Legislature by or under this Constitution, every High 
Court exercising jurisdiction immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh 
1. Subs. by the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973 (34 of 1973), s. 4, for entry (b)           
(w.e.f. 1-11-1973).   
2. Subs by the Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu (Merger of Union Territories) Act, 2019 (44 of 2019),                   
(w.e.f. 19-12-2019).  Entry (C) was ins. by the (Tenth Amendment) Act, 1961, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11-8-1961). 
3. Entry (d) omitted by the Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu (Merger of Union Territories) Act, 2019 (44 of 2019), 
(w.e.f. 19-12-2019). Original entry (d) was ins. by the Constitution (Twelfth Amendment) Act,1962, s.3 (w.e.f. 20-12-1961) and 
subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, for entry (d) (w.e.f. 30-5-1987). 
4. Ins. by the Constitution (fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 5 and 7 (w.e.f. 16-8-1962).  
5. Subs. by Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006) s. 4, for ―Pondicherry‖ (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).   
6.  The entry (f) relating to Mizoram omitted by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986, (34 of 1986), s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987). 
7. The entry (g) relating to Arunachal Pradesh omitted by the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 (69 of 1986), s. 42 (w.e.f.          
20-2-1987).  
8. Ins. by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 5 (w.e.f. 28-12-1962). 
9. Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4, for ―Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu or 
Pondicherry‖ (w.e.f. 15-2-1972). 
10. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for ―Pondicherry‖ (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).  
11. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15-2-1972).  
12. Subs. by ibid., for ―any existing law‖ (w.e.f. 15-2-1972).  
13. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29  and Sch., for ―State specified in Part C of the First Schedule‖ 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
14. Subs. by ibid., for ―such State‖. 
15. Subs. by ibid., for cls.(3) and (4). 
94 
Amendment) Act, 1956, in relation to any Union territory shall continue to exercise such jurisdiction in 
relation to that territory after such commencement. 
(4) Nothing in this article derogates from the power of Parliament to extend or exclude the jurisdiction of 
a High Court for a State to, or from, any Union territory or part thereof.] 
242. [Coorg.].–Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11
1956). 
1
 [PART IX 
THE PANCHAYATS 
243. Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) ―district‖ means a district in a State; 
(b) ―Gram Sabha‖ means a body consisting of persons registered in the electoral rolls relating to a 
village comprised within the area of Panchayat at the village level; 
(c) ―intermediate level‖ means a level between the village and district levels specified by the 
Governor of a State by public notification to be the intermediate level for the purposes of this Part; 
(d) ―Panchayat‖ means an institution (by whatever name called) of self-government constituted 
under article 243B, for the rural areas; 
(e) ―Panchayat area‖ means the territorial area of a Panchayat; 
(f) ―Population‖ means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the 
relevant figures have been published; 
(g) ―village‖ means a village specified by the Governor by public notification to be a village for the 
purposes of this Part and includes a group of villages so specified. 
243A. Gram Sabha.—A Gram Sabha may exercise such powers and perform such functions at the 
village level as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide. 
243B. Constitution of Panchayats.—(1) There shall be constituted in every State, Panchayats at the 
village, intermediate and district levels in accordance with the provisions of this Part. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), Panchayats at the intermediate level may not be constituted in a 
State having a population not exceeding twenty lakhs. 
243C. Composition of Panchayats.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, the Legislature of a 
State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the composition of Panchayats: 
Provided that the ratio between the population of the territorial area of a Panchayat at any level and the 
number of seats in such Panchayat to be filled by election shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout 
the State. 
(2) All the seats in a Panchayat shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial 
constituencies in the Panchayat area and, for this purpose, each Panchayat area shall be divided into 
territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the 
number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the Panchayat area. 
(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the representation— 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy third Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24-4-1993). Original Part IX was omitted by the 
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 24-4-1993). 
95 
(a) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the village level, in the Panchayats at the intermediate 
level or, in the case of a State not having Panchayats at the intermediate level, in the Panchayats at the 
district level; 
(b) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the intermediate level, in the Panchayats at the district 
level; 
(c) of the members of the House of the People and the members of the Legislative Assembly of the 
State representing constituencies which comprise wholly or partly a Panchayat area at a level other than 
the village level, in such Panchayat; 
(d) of the members of the Council of States and the members of the Legislative Council of the State, 
where they are registered as electors within— 
(i) a Panchayat area at the intermediate level, in Panchayat at the intermediate level; 
(ii) a Panchayat area at the district level, in Panchayat at the district level. 
(4) The Chairperson of a Panchayat and other members of a Panchayat whether or not chosen by direct 
election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area shall have the right to vote in the meetings of 
the Panchayats. 
(5) The Chairperson of— 
(a) a Panchayat at the village level shall be elected in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, 
by law, provide; and 
(b) a Panchayat at the intermediate level or district level shall be elected by, and from amongst, the 
elected members thereof. 
243D. Reservation of seats.—(1) Seats shall be reserved for— 
(a) the Scheduled Castes; and 
(b) the Scheduled Tribes, 
in every Panchayat and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion 
to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that Panchayat as the population of the 
Scheduled Castes in that Panchayat area or of the Scheduled Tribes in that Panchayat area bears to the total 
population of that area and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat. 
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (1) shall be reserved for 
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be,  the Scheduled Tribes. 
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in 
every Panchayat shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different 
constituencies in a Panchayat. 
(4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or any other level shall be reserved 
for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, 
by law, provide: 
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in any State shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same 
proportion to the total number of such offices in the Panchayats at each level as the population of the 
Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to the total population of the 
State: 
Provided further that not less than one-third of the total number of offices of Chairpersons in the 
96 
Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women: 
Provided also that the number of offices reserved under this clause shall be allotted by rotation to 
different Panchayats at each level. 
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons (other 
than the reservation for women) under clause (4) shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period 
specified in article 334. 
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from making any provision for reservation of 
seats in any Panchayat or offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at any level in favour of backward class of 
citizens. 
243E. Duration of Panchayats, etc.—(1) Every Panchayat, unless sooner dissolved under any law for 
the time being in force, shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no 
longer. 
(2) No amendment of any law for the time being in force shall have the effect of causing dissolution of a 
Panchayat at any level, which is functioning immediately before such amendment, till the expiration of its 
duration specified in clause (1). 
(3) An election to constitute a Panchayat shall be completed— 
(a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1); 
(b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution: 
Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Panchayat would have 
continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under this clause for 
constituting the Panchayat for such period. 
(4) A Panchayat constituted upon the dissolution of a Panchayat before the expiration of its duration 
shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Panchayat would have continued 
under clause (1) had it not been so dissolved. 
243F. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and 
for being, a member of a Panchayat— 
(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force for the purposes of 
elections to the Legislature of the State concerned: 
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less than twenty-five years of 
age, if he has attained the age of twenty-one years; 
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the Legislature of the State. 
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Panchayat has become subject to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the question shall be referred for the decision of such authority and 
in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide. 
243G. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.—Subject to the provisions of this 
Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority 
as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government and such law may contain 
provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Panchayats at the appropriate level, subject 
to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to— 
(a) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice; 
97 
(b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice as may be entrusted 
to them including those in relation to the matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule. 
243H. Powers to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Panchayats.—The Legislature of a State may, 
by law,— 
(a) authorise a Panchayat to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in 
accordance with such procedure and subject to such limits; 
(b) assign to a Panchayat such taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied and collected by the State 
Government for such purposes and subject to such conditions and limits; 
(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated Fund of the State; 
and 
(d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all moneys received, respectively, by or on 
behalf of the Panchayats and also for the withdrawal of such moneys therefrom, 
as may be specified in the law. 
243-I. Constitution of Finance Commission to review financial position.—(1) The Governor of a 
State shall, as soon as may be within one year from the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-third 
Amendment) Act, 1992, and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year, constitute a Finance Commission 
to review the financial position of the Panchayats and to make recommendations to the Governor as to— 
(a) the principles which should govern— 
(i) the distribution between the State and the Panchayats of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, 
tolls and fees leviable by the State, which may be divided between them under this Part and the 
allocation between the Panchayats at all levels of their respective shares of such proceeds; 
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be assigned to, or 
appropriated by, the Panchayats; 
(iii) the grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated Fund of the State; 
(b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the Panchayats; 
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Governor in the interests of sound 
finance of the Panchayats. 
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the composition of the Commission, the 
qualifications which shall be requisite for appointment as members thereof and the manner in which they 
shall be selected. 
(3) The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall have such powers in the performance of 
their functions as the Legislature of the State may, by law, confer on them. 
(4) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the Commission under this article together 
with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before the Legislature of the 
State. 
243J. Audit of accounts of Panchayats.—The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions 
with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Panchayats and the auditing of such accounts. 
243K. Elections to the Panchayats.—(1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation 
of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the Panchayats shall be vested in a State Election 
Commission consisting of a State Election Commissioner to be appointed by the Governor. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the Legislature of a State, the conditions of service   
and tenure of office of the State Election Commissioner shall be such as the Governor may by rule 
determine: 
98 
Provided that the State Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except in like 
manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of a High Court and the conditions of service of the State Election 
Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. 
(3) The Governor of a State shall, when so requested by the State Election Commission, make available 
to the State Election Commission such staff as may be necessary for the discharge of the functions conferred 
on the State Election Commission by clause (1). 
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision 
with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to the Panchayats. 
243L. Application to Union territories.—The provisions of this Part shall apply to the Union territories 
and shall, in their application to a Union territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor of a State 
were references to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under article 239 and references to the 
Legislature or the legislative Assembly of a State were references, in relation to a Union territory having a 
Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly: 
Provided that the President may, by public notification, direct that the provisions of this Part shall apply 
to any Union territory or part thereof subject to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the 
notification. 
243M.  Part not to apply to certain areas.—(1) Nothing in this Part shall apply to the Scheduled Areas 
referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas referred to in clause (2), of article 244. 
(2) Nothing in this Part shall apply to— 
(a) the States of Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram; 
(b) the hill areas in the State of Manipur for which District Councils exist under any law for the time 
being in force. 
(3) Nothing in this Part— 
(a) relating to Panchayats at the district level shall apply to the hill areas of the District of Darjeeling 
in the State of West Bengal for which Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council exists under any law for the time 
being in force; 
(b) shall be construed to affect the functions and powers of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council 
constituted under such law. 
1
 [(3A) Nothing in article 243D, relating to reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes, shall apply to 
the State of Arunachal Pradesh.] 
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,— 
(a) the Legislature of a State referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (2) may, by law, extend this part 
to that State, except the areas, if any, referred to in clause (1), if the Legislative Assembly of that State 
passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority 
of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting; 
(b) Parliament may, by law, extend the provisions of this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal 
areas referred to in clause (1) subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in such 
law, and no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 
368. 
243N. Continuance of existing laws and Panchayats.—Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any 
provision of any law relating to Panchayats in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the 
Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, 
shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8-9-2000).  
99 
authority or until the expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that all the Panchayats existing immediately before such commencement shall continue till the 
expiration of their duration, unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative 
Assembly of that State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House of the 
Legislature of that State. 
243-O. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.—Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution,— 
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to 
such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 243K, shall not be called in question in 
any court; 
(b) no election to any Panchayat shall be called in question except by an election petition presented 
to such authority and in such manner as is provided for by or under any law made by the Legislature of a 
State.] 
1
 [PART IXA 
THE MUNICIPALITIES 
243P. Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) ―Committee‖ means a Committee constituted under article 243S; 
(b) ―district‖ means a district in a State; 
(c) ―Metropolitan area‖ means an area having a population of ten lakhs or more, comprised in one or 
more districts and consisting of two or more Municipalities or Panchayats or other contiguous areas, 
specified by the Governor by public notification to be a Metropolitan area for the purposes of this Part; 
(d) ―Municipal area‖ means the territorial area of a Municipality as is notified by the Governor; 
(e) ―Municipality‖ means an institution of self-government constituted under article 243Q; 
(f) ―Panchayat‖ means a Panchayat constituted under article 243B; 
(g) ―population‖ means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the 
relevant figures have been published. 
243Q. Constitution of Municipalities.—(1) There shall be constituted in every State,— 
(a) a Nagar Panchayat (by whatever name called) for a transitional area, that is to say, an area in 
transition  from a rural area to an urban area; 
(b) a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area; and 
(c) a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area, 
in accordance with the provisions of this Part: 
Provided that a Municipality under this clause may not be constituted in such urban area or part thereof 
as the Governor may, having regard to the size of the area and the municipal services being provided or 
proposed to be provided by an industrial establishment in that area and such other factors as he may deem fit, 
by public notification, specify to be an industrial township. 
(2) In this article, ―a transitional area‖, ―a smaller urban area‖ or ―a larger urban area‖ means such area 
as the Governor may, having regard to the population of the area, the density of the population therein, the 
revenue generated for local administration, the percentage of employment in non-agricultural activities, the 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-6-1993).  
100 
economic importance or such other factors as he may deem fit, specify by public notification for the 
purposes of this Part. 
243R. Composition of Municipalities.—(1) Save as provided in clause (2), all the seats in a 
Municipality shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election from the territorial constituencies in the 
Municipal area and for this purpose each Municipal area shall be divided into territorial constituencies to be 
known as wards. 
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide— 
(a) for the representation in a Municipality of— 
(i) persons having special knowledge or experience in Municipal administration; 
(ii) the members of the House of the People and the members of the Legislative Assembly of the 
State representing constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the Municipal area; 
(iii) the members of the Council of States and the members of the Legislative Council of the 
State registered as electors within the Municipal area; 
(iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees constituted under clause (5) of article 243S: 
Provided that the persons referred to in paragraph (i) shall not have the right to vote in the 
meetings of the Municipality; 
(b) the manner of election of the Chairperson of a Municipality. 
243S. Constitution and composition of Wards Committees, etc.—(1) There shall be constituted 
Wards Committees, consisting of one or more wards, within the territorial area of a Municipality having a 
population of three lakhs or more. 
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to— 
(a) the composition and the territorial area of a Wards Committee; 
(b) the manner in which the seats in a Wards Committee shall be filled. 
(3) A member of a Municipality representing a ward within the territorial area of the Wards Committee 
shall be a member of that Committee. 
(4) Where a Wards Committee consists of— 
(a) one ward, the member representing that ward in the Municipality; or 
(b) two or more wards, one of the members representing such wards in the Municipality elected by 
the members of the Wards Committee, 
shall be the Chairperson of that Committee. 
(5) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the Legislature of a State from making any 
provision for the constitution of Committees in addition to the Wards Committees. 
243T. Reservation of seats.—(1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes in every Municipality and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same 
proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that Municipality as the population of 
the Scheduled Castes in the Municipal area or of the Scheduled Tribes in the Municipal area bears to the 
total population of that area and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a 
Municipality. 
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (1) shall be reserved for 
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes. 
101 
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in 
every Municipality shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different 
constituencies in a Municipality. 
(4) The offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide. 
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons (other 
than the reservation for women) under clause (4) shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period 
specified in article 334. 
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from making any provision for 
reservation of seats in any Municipality or offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities in favour of 
backward class of citizens. 
243U. Duration of Municipalities, etc.—(1) Every Municipality, unless sooner dissolved under any 
law for the time being in force, shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and 
no longer: 
Provided that a Municipality shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before its 
dissolution. 
(2) No amendment of any law for the time being in force shall have the effect of causing dissolution of a 
Municipality at any level, which is functioning immediately before such amendment, till the expiration of its 
duration specified in clause (1). 
(3) An election to constitute a Municipality shall be completed,— 
(a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1); 
(b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution: 
Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Municipality would have 
continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under this clause for 
constituting the Municipality for such period. 
(4) A Municipality constituted upon the dissolution of a Municipality before the expiration of its 
duration shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Municipality would have 
continued under clause (1) had it not been so dissolved. 
243V. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and 
for being, a member of a Municipality— 
(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force for the purposes of elections to 
the Legislature of the State concerned: 
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less than twenty-five years of 
age, if he has attained the age of twenty-one years; 
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the Legislature of the State. 
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Municipality has become subject to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the question shall be referred for the decision of such authority and 
in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide. 
243W. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities, etc.—Subject to the provisions of 
this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow— 
102 
(a) the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to 
function as institutions of self-government and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of 
powers and  responsibilities upon Municipalities, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, 
with respect to— 
(i) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice; 
(ii) the performance of functions and the implementation of schemes as may be entrusted to 
them including those in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule; 
(b) the Committees with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to carry out 
the responsibilities conferred upon them including those in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth 
Schedule. 
243X. Power to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Municipalities.—The Legislature of a State may, 
by law,— 
(a) authorise a Municipality to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in 
accordance with such procedure and subject to such limits; 
(b) assign to a Municipality such taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied and collected by the State 
Government for such purposes and subject to such conditions and limits; 
(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the Consolidated Fund of the 
State; and 
(d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all moneys received, respectively, by or on 
behalf of the Municipalities and also for the withdrawal of such moneys therefrom, 
as may be specified in the law. 
243Y. Finance Commission.—(1) The Finance Commission constituted under article 243-I shall also 
review the financial position of the Municipalities and make recommendations to the Governor as to— 
(a) the principles which should govern— 
(i) the distribution between the State and the Municipalities of the net proceeds of the taxes, 
duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State, which may be divided between them under this Part and 
the allocation between the Municipalities at all levels of their respective shares of such proceeds; 
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be assigned to, or 
appropriated by, the Municipalities; 
(iii) the grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the Consolidated Fund of the State; 
(b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the Municipalities; 
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Governor in the interests of sound 
finance of the Municipalities. 
(2) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the Commission under this article together 
with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before the Legislature of the 
State. 
243Z. Audit of accounts of Municipalities.—The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions 
with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts. 
243ZA. Elections to the Municipalities.—(1) The superintendence, direction and control of the 
preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the Municipalities shall be vested in the 
State Election Commission referred to in article 243K. 
103 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision 
with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to the Municipalities. 
243ZB. Application to Union territories.—The provisions of this Part shall apply to the Union 
territories and shall, in their application to a Union territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor 
of a State were references to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under article 239 and 
references to the Legislature or the Legislative Assembly of a State were references in relation to a Union 
territory having a Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly: 
Provided that the President may, by public notification, direct that the provisions of this Part shall apply 
to any Union territory or part thereof subject to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the 
notification. 
243ZC. Part not to apply to certain areas.—(1) Nothing in this Part shall apply to the Scheduled 
Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas referred to in clause (2) of article 244. 
(2) Nothing in this Part shall be construed to affect the functions and powers of the Darjeeling Gorkha 
Hill Council constituted under any law for the time being in force for the hill areas of the district of 
Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may, by law, extend the provisions of this 
Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in clause (1) subject to such exceptions and 
modifications as may be specified in such law, and no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of this 
Constitution for the purposes of article 368. 
243ZD. Committee for district planning.—(1) There shall be constituted in every State at the district 
level a District Planning Committee to consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats and the 
Municipalities in the district and to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole. 
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to— 
(a) the composition of the District Planning Committees; 
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled: 
Provided that not less than four-fifths of the total number of members of such Committee shall be 
elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of the Panchayat at the district level and of the 
Municipalities in the district in proportion to the ratio between the population of the rural areas and of 
the urban areas in the district; 
(c) the functions relating to district planning which may be assigned to such Committees; 
(d)  the manner in which the Chairpersons of such  Committees shall be chosen. 
(3) Every District Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft development plan,— 
(a)  have regard to— 
(i) matters of common interest between the Panchayats and the Municipalities including spatial 
planning, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, the integrated development of 
infrastructure and environmental conservation; 
(ii) the extent and type of available resources whether financial or otherwise; 
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor may, by order, specify. 
(4) The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall forward the development plan, as 
recommended by such Committee, to the Government of the State. 
104 
243ZE. Committee for Metropolitan planning.—(1) There shall be constituted in every Metropolitan 
area a Metropolitan Planning Committee to prepare a draft development plan for the Metropolitan area as a 
whole. 
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to— 
(a) the composition of the Metropolitan Planning Committees; 
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled: 
Provided that not less than two-thirds of the members of such Committee shall be elected by, and 
from amongst, the elected members of the Municipalities and Chairpersons of the Panchayats in the 
Metropolitan area in proportion to the ratio between the population of the Municipalities and of the 
Panchayats in that area; 
(c) the representation in such Committees of the Government of India and the Government of the 
State and of such organisations and institutions as may be deemed necessary for carrying out the 
functions assigned to such Committees; 
(d) the functions relating to planning and coordination for the Metropolitan area which may be 
assigned to such Committees; 
(e) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees shall be chosen. 
(3) Every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft development plan,— 
(a) have regard to— 
(i) the plans prepared by the Municipalities and the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area; 
(ii) matters of common interest between the Municipalities and the Panchayats, including co
ordinated spatial planning of the area, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, the 
integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation; 
(iii) the overall objectives and priorities set by the Government of India and the Government of 
the State; 
(iv) the extent and nature of investments likely to be made in the Metropolitan area by agencies 
of the Government of India and of the Government of the State and other available resources 
whether financial or otherwise; 
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor may, by order, specify. 
(4) The Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall forward the development plan, as 
recommended by such Committee, to the Government of the State.  
243ZF. Continuance of existing laws and Municipalities.—Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any 
provision of any law relating to Municipalities in force in a State immediately before the commencement of 
the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, which is inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent 
authority or until the expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that all the Municipalities existing immediately before such commencement shall continue till   
the expiration of their duration, unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the 
Legislative Assembly of that State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House of 
the Legislature of that State. 
105 
243ZG. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.—Notwithstanding anything in this  
Constitution,— 
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to 
such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 243ZA shall not be called in question 
in any court; 
(b) no election to any Municipality shall be called in question except by an election petition 
presented to such authority and in such manner as is provided for by or under any law made by the 
Legislature of a State.] 
1
 [PART IXB 
THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES 
243ZH. Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) ―authorised person‖ means a person referred to as such in article 243ZQ;  
(b) ―board‖ means the board of directors or the governing body of a co-operative society, by 
whatever name called, to which the direction and control of the management of the affairs of a society is 
entrusted to; 
(c) ―co-operative society‖ means a society registered or deemed to be registered under any law 
relating to co-operative societies for the time being in force in any State; 
(d) ―multi-State co-operative society‖ means a society with objects not confined to one State and 
registered or deemed to be registered under any law for the time being in force relating to such co
operatives; 
(e) ―Office bearer‖ means a President, Vice-President, Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary or 
Treasurer, of a co-operative society and includes any other person to be elected by the board of any co
operative society; 
(f) ―Registrar‖ means the Central Registrar appointed by the Central Government in relation to the 
multi-State co-operative societies and the Registrar for co-operative societies appointed by the State  
Government under the law made by the Legislature of a State in relation to co-operative societies; 
(g) ―State Act‖ means any law made by the Legislature of a State;  
(h) ―State level co-operative society‖ means a co-operative society having its area of operation 
extending to the whole of a State and defined as such in any law made by the Legislature of a State. 
243ZI. Incorporation of co-operative societies.—Subject to the provisions of this Part, the 
Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the incorporation, regulation and 
winding up of co-operative societies based on the principles of voluntary formation, democratic member
control, member-economic participation and autonomous functioning. 
243ZJ. Number and term of members of board and its office bearers.—(1) The board shall consist 
of such number of directors as may be provided by the Legislature of a State, by law: 
Provided that the maximum number of directors of a co-operative society shall not exceed twenty-one:  
Provided further that the Legislature of a State shall, by law, provide for the reservation of one seat for 
the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and two seats for women on board of every co-operative 
society consisting of individuals as members and having members from such class of category of persons. 
(2) The term of office of elected members of the board and its office bearers shall be five years from the 
date of election and the term of office bearers shall be coterminous with the term of the board: 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 2011, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15-2-2012). 
106 
Provided that the board may fill a casual vacancy on the board by nomination out of the same class of 
members in respect of which the casual vacancy has arisen, if the term of office of the board is less than half 
of its original term. 
(3) The Legislature of a State shall, by law, make provisions for co-option of persons to be members of 
the board having experience in the field of banking, management, finance or specialisation in any other field 
relating to the objects and activities undertaken by the co-operative society, as members of the board of such 
society:  
Provided that the number of such co-opted members shall not exceed two in addition to twenty-one 
directors specified in the first proviso to clause (1):  
Provided further that such co-opted members shall not have the right to vote in any election of the co
operative society in their capacity as such member or to be eligible to be elected as office bearers of the 
board: 
Provided also that the functional directors of a co-operative society shall also be the members of the 
board and such members shall be excluded for the purpose of counting the total number of directors 
specified in the first proviso to clause (1). 
243ZK. Election of members of board.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law made by 
the Legislature of a State, the election of a board shall be conducted before the expiry of the term of the 
board so as to ensure that the newly elected members of the board assume office immediately on the expiry 
of the term of the office of members of the outgoing board. 
(2) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct 
of, all elections to a co-operative society shall vest in such an authority or body, as may be provided by the 
Legislature of a State, by law:  
Provided that the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the procedure and guidelines for the 
conduct of such elections. 
243ZL. Supersession and suspension of board and interim management.—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no board shall be superseded or kept under 
supersession for a period exceeding six months:  
Provided that the board may be superseded or kept under suspension in a case— 
(i) of its persistent default; or 
(ii) of negligence in the performance of its duties; or  
(iii) the board has committed any act prejudicial to the interests of the co-operative society or its 
members; or 
(iv) there is stalemate in the constitution or functions of the board; or  
(v)  the authority or body as provided by the Legislature of a State, by law, under clause (2) of article 
243ZK, has failed to conduct elections in accordance with the provisions of the State Act: 
Provided further that the board of any such co-operative society shall not be superseded or kept 
under suspension where there is no Government shareholding or loan or financial assistance or any 
guarantee by the Government:  
Provided also that in case of a co-operative society carrying on the business of banking, the 
provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 shall also apply:  
107 
Provided also that in case of a co-operative society, other than a multi- State co-operative society, 
carrying on the business of banking, the provisions of this clause shall have the effect as if for the words ―six months‖, the words ―one year‖ had been substituted. 
(2) In case of supersession of a board, the administrator appointed to manage the affairs of such co
operative society shall arrange for conduct of elections within the period specified in clause (1) and hand 
over the management to the elected board. 
(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions for the conditions of service of the 
administrator. 
243ZM. Audit of accounts of co-operative societies.—(1) The Legislature of a State may, by law, 
make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the co-operative societies and the auditing 
of such accounts at least once in each financial year. 
(2) The Legislature of a State shall, by law, lay down the minimum qualifications and experience of 
auditors and auditing firms that shall be eligible for auditing accounts of the co-operative societies. 
(3) Every co-operative society shall cause to be audited by an auditor or auditing firms referred to in 
clause (2) appointed by the general body of the co-operative society:  
Provided that such auditors or auditing firms shall be appointed from a panel approved by a State 
Government or an authority authorised by the State Government in this behalf. 
(4) The accounts of every co-operative society shall be audited within six months of the close of the 
financial year to which such accounts relate. 
(5) The audit report of the accounts of an apex co-operative society, as may be defined by the State Act, 
shall be laid before the State Legislature in the manner, as may be provided by the State Legislature, by law. 
243ZN. Convening of general body meetings.—The Legislature of a State may, by law, make 
provisions that the annual general body meeting of every co-operative society shall be convened within a 
period of six months of close of the financial year to transact the business as may be provided in such law. 
243ZO. Right of a member to get information.—(1) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide 
for access to every member of a co-operative society to the books, information and accounts of the co
operative society kept in regular transaction of its business with such members. 
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions to ensure the participation of members of 
the management of the co-operative society providing minimum requirement of attending meetings by the 
members and utilising the minimum level of services as may be provided in such law. 
(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for co-operative education and training for its 
members. 
243ZP. Returns.—(1) Every co-operative society shall file returns, within six months of the close of 
every financial year, to the authority designated by the State Government including the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) annual report of its activities; 
(b) its audited statement of accounts;  
(c) plan for surplus disposal as approved by the general body of the co-operative society;  
(d) list of amendments to the bye-laws of the co-operative society, if any; 
(e) declaration regarding date of holding of its general body meeting and conduct of elections when 
due; and 
108 
(f) any other information required by the Registrar in pursuance of any of the provisions of the State  
Act. 
243ZQ. Offences and penalties.—(1) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions for the 
offences relating to the co-operative societies and penalties for such offences. 
(2) A law made by the Legislature of a State under clause (1) shall include the commission of the 
following act or omission as offences, namely:— 
(a) a co-operative society or an officer or member thereof wilfully makes a false return or furnishes 
false information, or any person wilfully not furnishes any information required from him by a person 
authorised in this behalf under the provisions of the State Act; 
(b) any person wilfully or without any reasonable excuse disobeys any summons, requisition or 
lawful written order issued under the provisions of the State Act;  
(c) any employer who, without sufficient cause, fails to pay to a co-operative society amount 
deducted by him from its employee within a period of fourteen days from the date on which such 
deduction is made;  
(d) any officer or custodian who wilfully fails to handover custody of books, accounts, documents, 
records, cash, security and other property belonging to a co-operative society of which he is an officer or 
custodian, to an authorised person; and 
(e) whoever, before, during or after the election of members of the board or office bearers, adopts 
any corrupt practice. 
243ZR. Application to multi-State co-operative societies.—The provisions of this Part shall apply to 
the multi-State co-operative societies subject to the modification that any reference to ―Legislature of a 
State‖, ―State Act‖ or State Government‖ shall be construed as a reference to ―Parliament‖, ―Central Act‖ or ―the Central Government‖ respectively. 
243ZS. Application to Union territories.—The provisions of this Part shall apply to the Union 
territories and shall, in their application to a Union territory, having no Legislative Assembly as if the 
references to the Legislature of a State were a reference to the administrator thereof appointed under article 
239 and, in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly: 
Provided that the President may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of this 
Part shall not apply to any Union territory or part thereof as he may specify in the notification. 
243ZT. Continuance of existing laws.— Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of any 
law relating to co-operative societies in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the 
Constitution (Ninety-seventh  Amendment) Act, 2011, which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, 
shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent 
authority or until the expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is less.] 
PART X 
THE SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL AREAS 
244. Administration of Scheduled Areas and tribal areas.—(1) The provisions of the  Fifth  Schedule  
109 
shall apply to the administration and control of the Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes in any State1*** 
other  than 2[the States of Assam, 3[4[Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.]]] 
(2) The provisions of the Sixth Schedule shall apply to the administration of the tribal areas in the States 
of Assam, 5[, 6[Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram]. 
7
 [244A. Formation of an autonomous State comprising certain tribal areas in Assam and creation 
of local Legislature or Council of Ministers or both therefor.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution, Parliament may, by law, form within the State of Assam an autonomous State comprising 
(whether wholly or in part) all or any of the tribal areas specified in 8[Part I] of the table appended to 
paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule and create therefor— 
(a) a body, whether elected or partly nominated and partly elected, to function as a Legislature for 
the autonomous State, or 
(b) a Council of Ministers, 
or both with such constitution, powers and functions, in each case, as may be specified in the law. 
(2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) may, in particular,— 
(a) specify the matters enumerated in the State List or the Concurrent List with respect to which the 
Legislature of the autonomous State shall have power to make laws for the whole or any part thereof, 
whether to the exclusion of the Legislature of the State of Assam or otherwise; 
(b) define the matters with respect to which the executive power of the autonomous State shall 
extend; 
(c) provide that any tax levied by the State of Assam shall be assigned to the autonomous State in so 
far as the proceeds thereof are attributable to the autonomous State; 
(d) provide that any reference to a State in any article of this Constitution shall be construed as 
including a reference to the autonomous State; and 
(e) make such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions as may be deemed necessary. 
(3) An amendment of any such law as aforesaid in so far as such amendment relates to any of the 
matters specified in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) of clause (2) shall have no effect unless the amendment 
is passed in each House of Parliament by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting. 
(4) Any such law as is referred to in this article shall not be deemed to be an amendment of this 
Constitution for the purposes of article 368 notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or 
has the effect of amending this Constitution.] 
1. The words and letters ―specified in Part A and Part B of the First Schedule‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956,  s.29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2.Subs. by the North Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act,1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for  ―the State of Assam‖ (w.e.f. 21-1-1972). 
3.Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2 for ―and Meghalaya‖ (w.e.f. 1-4-1985). 
4.Subs. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39, for ―Meghalaya and Tripura‖ (w.e.f. 20-2-1987). 
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2, for ―and Meghalaya‖ (w.e.f. 1-4-1985).  
6. Subs. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39, for ―Meghalaya and Tripura and the Union territory of Mizoram‖ 
(w.e.f. 20-2-1987). 
7.Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25-9-1969). 
8. Subs. by the North Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for ―Part A‖ (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).  