PART XI 
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES 
CHAPTER I.—LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS 
Distribution of  Legislative Powers 
245. Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States.—(1) Subject to the 
provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India, 
and the Legislature of a State may make laws for the whole or any part of the State. 
(2) No law made by Parliament shall be deemed to be invalid on the ground that it would have extra
territorial operation. 
246. Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3), Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect 
to any of the matters enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the ―Union List‖). 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3), Parliament, and, subject to clause (1), the Legislature of any 
State 1*** also, have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List III in the 
Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the ―Concurrent List‖). 
(3) Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of any State has exclusive power to make laws for such 
State or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule (in 
this Constitution referred to as the ―State List‖).  
(4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory of India 
not included 2[in a State] notwithstanding that such matter is a matter enumerated in the State List. 
3
 [246A. Special provision with respect to goods and services tax.—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in articles 246 and 254, Parliament, and, subject to clause (2), the Legislature of every State, have 
power to make laws with respect to goods and services tax imposed by the Union or by such State. 
(2) Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to goods and services tax where the 
supply of goods, or of services, or both takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. 
Explanation.—The provisions of this article, shall, in respect of goods and services tax referred to in 
clause (5) of article 279A, take effect from the date recommended by the Goods and Services Tax Council.] 
247. Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of certain additional courts.—
 Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, Parliament may by law provide for the establishment of any 
additional courts for the better administration of laws made by Parliament or of any existing laws with 
respect to a matter enumerated in the Union List. 
248. Residuary powers of legislation.—(1) 4[Subject to article 246A, Parliament]has exclusive power 
to make any law with respect to any matter not enumerated in the Concurrent List or State List. 
(2) Such power shall include the power of making any law imposing a tax not mentioned in either of 
those Lists. 
249. Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter in the State List in the national 
interest.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, if the Council of States 
has declared by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting that it     
1. The words and letters  ―specified in Part A and Part B of the First Schedule‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956,  s.29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Subs. by ibid., for ―in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule‖.  
3. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First  Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for the word ―Parliament‖. 
111 
is necessary or expedient in the national interest that Parliament should make laws with respect to1[goods 
and services tax provided under article 246A or] any matter enumerated in the State List specified in the 
resolution, it shall be lawful for Parliament to make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India 
with respect to that matter while the resolution remains in force. 
(2) A resolution passed under clause (1) shall remain in force for such period not exceeding one year as 
may be specified therein:  
Provided that, if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in force of any such resolution is 
passed in the manner provided in clause (1), such resolution shall continue in force for a further period of 
one year from the date on which under this clause it would otherwise have ceased to be in force. 
(3) A law made by Parliament which Parliament would not but for the passing of a resolution under clause 
(1) have been competent to make shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration 
of a period of six months after the resolution has ceased to be in force, except as respects things done or 
omitted to be done before the expiration of the said period. 
250. Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to any matter in the State List if a Proclamation 
of Emergency is in operation.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, Parliament shall, while a 
Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, have power to make laws for the whole or any part of the 
territory of India with respect to 2[goods and services tax provided under article 246A or]any of the matters 
enumerated in the State List. 
(2) A law made by Parliament which Parliament would not but for the issue of a Proclamation of 
Emergency have been competent to make shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the 
expiration of a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate, except as respects things done 
or omitted to be done before the expiration of the said period. 
251. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament under articles 249 and 250 and laws made by 
the Legislatures of States.—Nothing in articles 249 and 250 shall restrict the power of the Legislature of a 
State to make any law which under this Constitution it has power to make, but if any provision of a law 
made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament which 
Parliament has under either of the said articles power to make, the law made by Parliament, whether passed 
before or after the law made by the Legislature of the State, shall prevail, and the law made by the 
Legislature of the State shall to the extent of the repugnancy, but so long only as the law made by Parliament 
continues to have effect, be inoperative. 
252. Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by consent and adoption of such 
legislation by any other State.—(1) If it appears to the Legislatures of two or more States to be desirable 
that any of the matters with respect to which Parliament has no power to make laws for the States except as 
provided in articles 249 and 250 should be regulated in such States by Parliament by law, and if resolutions 
to that effect are passed by all the Houses of the Legislatures of those States, it shall be lawful for Parliament 
to pass an act for regulating that matter accordingly, and any Act so passed shall apply to such States and to 
any other State by which it is adopted afterwards by resolution passed in that behalf by the House or, where 
there are two Houses, by each of the Houses of the Legislature of that State. 
(2) Any Act so passed by Parliament may be amended or repealed by an Act of Parliament passed or 
adopted in like manner but shall not, as respects any State to which it applies, be amended or repealed by an 
Act of the Legislature of that State. 
253. Legislation for giving effect to international agreements.—Notwithstanding anything in the 
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament has power to make any law for the whole or any part of the 
territory of India for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries 
or any decision made at any international conference, association or other body. 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First  Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 4 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid., for the word ―Parliament‖ (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
112 
254. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of 
States.—(1) If any provision of a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to any provision of a 
law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact, or to any provision of an existing law with 
respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List, then, subject to the provisions of clause (2), 
the law made by Parliament, whether passed before or after the law made by the Legislature of such State, 
or, as the case may be, the existing law, shall prevail and the law made by the Legislature of the State shall, 
to the extent of the repugnancy, be void. 
(2) Where a law made by the Legislature of a State1*** with respect to one of the matters enumerated in 
the Concurrent List contains any provision repugnant to the provisions of an earlier law made by Parliament 
or an existing law with respect to that matter, then, the law so made by the Legislature of such State shall, if 
it has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has received his assent, prevail in that State: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent Parliament from enacting at any time any law with 
respect to the same matter including a law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the 
Legislature of the State. 
255. Requirements as to recommendations and previous sanctions to be regarded as matters of 
procedure only.—No Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State1***, and no provision in any such 
Act, shall be invalid by reason only that some recommendation or previous sanction required by this 
Constitution was not given, if assent to that Act was given— 
(a) where the recommendation required was that of the Governor, either by the Governor or by the 
President; 
(b) where the recommendation required was that of the Rajpramukh, either by the Rajpramukh or by 
the President; 
(c) where the recommendation or previous sanction required was that of the President, by the 
President. 
CHAPTER II.—ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS 
General 
256. Obligation of States and the Union.—The executive power of every State shall be so exercised as to 
ensure compliance with the laws made by Parliament and any existing laws which apply in that State, and the 
executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of such directions to a State as may appear to the 
Government of India to be necessary for that purpose. 
257. Control of the Union over States in certain cases.—(1) The executive power of every State shall 
be so exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive power of the Union, and the 
executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of such directions to a State as may appear to the 
Government of India to be necessary for that purpose. 
(2) The executive power of the Union shall also extend to the giving of directions to a State as to the 
construction and maintenance of means of communication declared in the direction to be of national or 
military importance: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be taken as restricting the power of Parliament to declare 
highways or waterways to be national highways or national waterways or the power of the Union with 
respect to the highways or waterways so declared or the power of the Union to construct and maintain means 
of communication as part of its functions with respect to naval, military and air force works. 
(3) The executive power of the Union shall also extend to the giving of directions to a State as to the 
measures to be taken for the protection of the railways within the State. 
1. The words and letters  ―specified in Part A and Part B of the First Schedule‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956,  s.29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
113 
(4) Where in carrying out any direction given to a State under clause (2) as to the construction or 
maintenance of any means of communication or under clause (3) as to the measures to be taken for the 
protection of any railway, costs have been incurred in excess of those which would have been incurred in the 
discharge of the normal duties of the State if such direction had not been given, there shall be paid by the 
Government of India to the State such sum as may be agreed, or, in default of agreement, as may be 
determined by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India, in respect of the extra costs so incurred 
by the State. 
1
 [257A. Assistance to States by deployment of armed forces or other forces of the Union.].—Omitted 
by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 33 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
258. Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on States in certain cases.—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything in this Constitution, the President may, with the consent of the Government of a State, entrust 
either conditionally or unconditionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to any 
matter to which the executive power of the Union extends. 
(2) A law made by Parliament which applies in any State may, notwithstanding that it relates to a matter 
with respect to which the Legislature of the State has no power to make laws, confer powers and impose 
duties, or authorise the conferring of powers and the imposition of duties, upon the State or officers and 
authorities thereof. 
(3) Where by virtue of this article powers and duties have been conferred or imposed upon a State or 
officers or authorities thereof, there shall be paid by the Government of India to the State such sum as may 
be agreed, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice 
of India, in respect of any extra costs of administration incurred by the State in connection with the exercise 
of those powers and duties. 
2
 [258A. Power of the States to entrust functions to the Union.—Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution, the Governor of a State may, with the consent of the Government of India, entrust either 
conditionally or unconditionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to any matter to 
which the executive power of the State extends.] 
259. [Armed Forces in States in Part B of the First Schedule.]—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.(w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
260. Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside India.—The Government of India 
may by agreement with the Government of any territory not being part of the territory of India undertake any 
executive, legislative or judicial functions vested in the Government of such territory, but every such 
agreement shall be subject to, and governed by, any law relating to the exercise of foreign jurisdiction for the 
time being in force. 
261. Public acts, records and judicial proceedings.—(1) Full faith and credit shall be given 
throughout the territory of India to public acts, records and judicial proceedings of the Union and of every 
State. 
(2) The manner in which and the conditions under which the acts, records and proceedings referred to in 
clause (1) shall be proved and the effect thereof determined shall be as provided by law made by Parliament. 
(3) Final judgments or orders delivered or passed by civil courts in any part of the territory of India shall 
be capable of execution anywhere within that territory according to law.  
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 43 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
2.Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.18 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
114 
Disputes relating to Waters 
262. Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers or river valleys.—(1) 
Parliament may by law provide for the adjudication of any dispute or complaint with respect to the use, 
distribution or control of the waters of, or in, any inter-State river or river valley. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may by law provide that neither the 
Supreme Court nor any other court shall exercise jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or complaint as 
is referred to in clause (1). 
Co-ordination between States 
263. Provisions with respect to an inter-State Council.—If at any time it appears to the President that 
the public interests would be served by the establishment of a Council charged with the duty of— 
(a) inquiring into and advising upon disputes which may have arisen between States; 
(b) investigating and discussing subjects in which some or all of the States, or the Union and one or 
more of  the States, have a common interest; or 
(c) making recommendations upon any such subject and, in particular, recommendations for the 
better co-ordination of policy and action with respect to that subject,  
it shall be lawful for the President by order to establish such a Council, and to define the nature of the duties 
to be performed by it and its organisation and procedure. 
PART XII 
FINANCE, PROPERTY, CONTRACTS AND SUITS 
CHAPTER I.—FINANCE 
General 
1
 [264. Interpretation.—In this Part, ―Finance Commission‖ means a Finance Commission constituted 
under article 280.] 
265. Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law.—No tax shall be levied or collected except by 
authority of law. 
266. Consolidated Funds and public accounts of India and of the States.—(1) Subject to the 
provisions of article 267 and to the provisions of this Chapter with respect to the assignment of the whole or 
part of the net proceeds of certain taxes and duties to States, all revenues received by the Government of 
India, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances 
and all moneys received by that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to be 
entitled  ―the Consolidated Fund of India‖, and all revenues received by the Government of a State, all loans 
raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys 
received by that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to be entitled ―the 
Consolidated Fund of the State‖. 
(2) All other public moneys received by or on behalf of the Government of India or the Government of a 
State shall be credited to the public account of India or the public account of the State, as the case may be.  
(3) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State shall be 
appropriated except in accordance with law and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this 
Constitution. 
267. Contingency Fund.—(1) Parliament may by law establish a Contingency Fund in the nature of     
an imprest to be entitled ―the Contingency Fund of India‖  into which shall be paid from time to time such 
sums as may be determined by such law, and the said  Fund  shall be  placed at the  disposal of the  President                
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
115 
to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure 
pending authorisation of such expenditure by Parliament by law under article 115 or article 116. 
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law establish a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be 
entitled ―the Contingency Fund of the State‖ into which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be 
determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be placed at the disposal of the Governor 1*** of the State      
to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the purposes of meeting unforeseen         
expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the Legislature of the State by law under article 205 
or article 206.  
Distribution of Revenues between the Union and the States 
268. Duties levied by the Union but collected and appropriated by the States.—(1) Such stamp 
duties 2*** as are mentioned in the Union List shall be levied by the Government of India but shall be 
collected— 
(a) in the case where such duties are leviable within any 3[Union territory], by the Government of 
India, and 
(b) in other cases, by the States within which such duties are respectively leviable. 
(2) The proceeds in any financial year of any such duty leviable within any State shall not form part of 
the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to that State. 
4
 268A. [Service tax levied by Union and collected and appropriated by the Union and the State.].—
 Omitted by the constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 7 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
269. Taxes levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the States.—5[(1) Taxes on the sale or 
purchase of goods and taxes on the consignment of goods6[except as provided in article 269A] shall be 
levied and collected by the Government of India but shall be assigned and shall be deemed to have been 
assigned to the States on or after the 1st day of April, 1996 in the manner provided in clause (2). 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,— 
(a) the expression "taxes on the sale or purchase of goods" shall mean taxes on sale or purchase of 
goods other than newspapers, where such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade 
or commerce; 
(b) the expression ―taxes on the consignment of goods‖ shall mean taxes on the consignment of 
goods (whether the consignment is to the person making it or to any other person), where such 
consignment takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. 
(2) The net proceeds in any financial year of any such tax, except in so far as those proceeds represent 
proceeds attributable to Union territories, shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be 
assigned to the States within which that tax is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed among those 
States in accordance with such principles of distribution as may be formulated by Parliament by law.] 
7
 [(3) Parliament may by law formulate principles for determining when a 8[sale or purchase of, or 
consignment of, goods] takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.] 
9[269A. Levy and collection of goods and services tax in course of inter-State trade or commerce.— 
commerce.— (1) Goods and services tax on supplies in the course of inter-State trade or commerce shall                           
1. The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. The words ―and such duties of excise on medicinal and toilet preparations‖ omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First 
Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 6 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).  
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for ―State specified in Part C of the First Schedule‖ 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
4.Art. 268A was ins. by the  Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2.For the text of that Act, see Appendix-III (date 
of enforcement yet to be notified). 
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2, for cls. (1) and (2) (w.e.f. 9-6-2000). 
6. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016 s. 8 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
7.Ins. by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11-9-1956). 
8.Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982, s.2, for ―sale or purchase of good‖ (w.e.f. 2-2-1983). 
9. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 9 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).  
116 
be levied and collected by the Government of India and such tax shall be apportioned between the Union and 
the States in the manner as may be provided by Parliament by law on the recommendations of the Goods and 
Services Tax Council. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, supply of goods, or of services, or both in the course of 
import into the territory of India shall be deemed to be supply of goods, or of services, or both in the course 
of inter-State trade or commerce. 
(2) The amount apportioned to a State under clause (1) shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 
(3) Where an amount collected as tax levied under clause (1) has been used for payment of the tax 
levied by a State under article 246A, such amount shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India. 
(4) Where an amount collected as tax levied by a State under article 246A has been used for payment 
of the tax levied under clause (1), such amount shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of the State. 
(5) Parliament may, by law, formulate the principles for determining the place of supply, and when a 
supply of goods, or of services, or both takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.] 
1
 [270. Taxes levied and  distributed between the Union and the States.—(1) All taxes and duties 
referred to in the Union List, except the duties and taxes referred to in articles 2[268, 269 and 269A], 
respectively, surcharge on taxes and duties referred to in article 271 and any cess levied for specific purposes 
under any law made by Parliament shall be levied and collected by the Government of India and shall be 
distributed between the Union and the States in the manner provided in clause (2). 
3
 [(1A) The tax collected by the Union under clause (1) of article 246A shall also be distributed between 
the Union and the States in the manner provided in clause (2). 
(1B) The tax levied and collected by the Union under clause (2) of article 246A and article 269A, 
which has been used for payment of the tax levied by the Union under clause (1) of article 246A, and the 
amount apportioned to the Union under clause (1) of article 269A, shall also be distributed between the 
Union and the States in the manner provided in clause (2).] 
(2) Such percentage, as may be prescribed, of the net proceeds of any such tax or duty in any financial 
year shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to the States within which 
that tax or duty is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed among those States in such manner and from 
such time as may be prescribed in the manner provided in clause (3). 
(3) In this article, ―prescribed‖means,— 
(i) until a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by the President by order, and 
(ii) after a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by the President by order after 
considering the recommendations of the  Finance Commission.] 
271. Surcharge on certain duties and taxes for purposes of the Union.—Notwithstanding anything in 
articles 269 and 270, Parliament may at any time increase any of the duties or taxes referred to in those 
articles 4[except the goods and services tax under article 246A,]by a surcharge for purposes of the Union and 
the whole proceeds of any such surcharge shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of India. 
272. [Taxes which are levied and collected by the Union and may be distributed between the Union and 
the States.].–Omitted by the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 4 (w.e.f. 9-6-2000). 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 3 (w.e.f. 9-6-2000). 
2. The words and figures in 268 and 269 substituted as ―268, 268A and 269‖ by the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 
2003, s. 3.For the text of that Act, see Appendix-III (not enforced)and further substituted by the Constitution (One Hundred and 
First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 10 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
3. Ins. by ibid. 
4. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 11 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
117 
1
 273. Grants in lieu of export duty on jute and jute products.—(1) There shall be charged on the 
Consolidated Fund of India in each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of the States of Assam, Bihar, 
[Odisha] and West Bengal, in lieu of assignment of any share of the net proceeds in each year of export 
duty on jute and jute products to those States, such sums as may be prescribed. 
(2) The sums so prescribed shall continue to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India so long as 
any export duty on jute or jute products continues to be levied by the Government of India or until the 
expiration of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution whichever is earlier. 
(3) In this article, the expression ―prescribed‖ has the same meaning as in article 270. 
274. Prior recommendation of President required to Bills affecting taxation in which States are 
interested.—(1) No Bill or amendment which imposes or varies any tax or duty in which States are 
interested, or which varies the meaning of the expression ―agricultural income‖ as defined for the purposes 
of the enactments relating to Indian income-tax, or which affects the principles on which under any of the 
foregoing provisions of this Chapter moneys are or may be distributable to States, or which imposes any 
such surcharge for the purposes of the Union as is mentioned in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, 
shall be introduced or moved in either House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the President. 
(2) In this article, the expression ―tax or duty in which States are interested‖ means— 
(a) a tax or duty the whole or part of the net proceeds whereof are assigned to any State; or 
(b) a tax or duty by reference to the net proceeds whereof sums are for the time being payable out of 
the Consolidated Fund of India to any State. 
275. Grants from the Union to certain States.—(1) Such sums as Parliament may by law provide shall 
be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India in each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of such States as 
Parliament may determine to be in need of assistance, and different sums may be fixed for different States: 
Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the revenues 
of a State such capital and recurring sums as may be necessary to enable that State to meet the costs of such 
schemes of development as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for 
the purpose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in that State or raising the level of 
administration of the Scheduled Areas therein to that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that 
State: 
Provided further that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the 
revenues of the State of Assam sums, capital and recurring, equivalent to— 
(a) the average excess of expenditure over the revenues during the two years immediately preceding 
the commencement of this Constitution in respect of the administration of the tribal areas specified in 
2
 [Part I] of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule; and 
(b) the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by that State with the approval 
of the Government of India for the purpose of raising the level of administration of the said areas to that 
of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State. 
31[(1A) On and from the formation of the autonomous State under article 244A,— 
(i) any sums payable under clause (a) of the second proviso to clause (1) shall, if the autonomous 
State comprises all the tribal areas referred to therein, be paid to the autonomous State, and, if the 
autonomous State comprises only some of those tribal areas, be apportioned between the State of Assam 
and the autonomous State as the President may, by order, specify; 
(ii) there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the revenues of the 
autonomous State sums, capital and  recurring, equivalent  to the costs of such  schemes of  development           
1. Subs. by Orissa (Alteration of Name) Act, 2011 (15 of 2011) s. 5, for ―Orissa‖ (w.e.f. 1-11-2011). 
2. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971) s. 71, for ― Part A‖ (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).  
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 3( w.e.f. 25-9-1969). 
118 
as may be undertaken by the autonomous State with the approval of the Government of India for the 
purpose of raising the level of administration of that State to that of the administration of the rest of the 
State of Assam.] 
(2) Until provision is made by Parliament under clause (1), the powers conferred on Parliament under 
that clause shall be exercisable by the President by order and any order made by the President under this 
clause shall have effect subject to any provision so made by Parliament: 
Provided that after a Finance Commission has been constituted no order shall be made under this clause 
by the President except after considering the recommendations of the Finance Commission. 
276. Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in article 
246, no law of the Legislature of a State relating to taxes for the benefit of the State or of a municipality, district 
board, local board or other local authority therein in respect of professions, trades, callings or employments shall 
be invalid on the ground that it relates to a tax on income. 
(2) The total amount payable in respect of any one person to the State or to any one municipality, district 
board, local board or other local authority in the State by way of taxes on professions, trades, callings and 
employments shall not exceed 1[two thousand and five hundred rupees] per annum. 
2
 *        
*      
*   
*         
* 
(3) The power of the Legislature of a State to make laws as aforesaid with respect to taxes on 
professions, trades, callings and employments shall not be construed as limiting in any way the power of 
Parliament to make laws with respect to taxes on income accruing from or arising out of professions, trades, 
callings and employments. 
277. Savings.—Any taxes, duties, cesses or fees which, immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution, were being lawfully levied by the Government of any State or by any municipality or other 
local authority or body for the purposes of the State, municipality, district or other local area may, 
notwithstanding that those taxes, duties, cesses or fees are mentioned in the Union List, continue to be levied 
and to be applied to the same purposes until provision to the contrary is made by Parliament by law. 
278. [Agreement with States in Part B of the First Schedule with regard to certain financial matters.]
Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.(w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
279. Calculation of ―net proceeds‖, etc.—(1) In the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, ―net 
proceeds‖ means in relation to any tax or duty the proceeds thereof reduced by the cost of collection, and for 
the purposes of those provisions the net proceeds of any tax or duty, or of any part of any tax or duty, in or 
attributable to any area shall be ascertained and certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, 
whose certificate shall be final. 
(2) Subject as aforesaid, and to any other express provision of this Chapter, a law made by Parliament or 
an order of the President may, in any case where under this Part the proceeds of any duty or tax are, or may 
be, assigned to any State, provide for the manner in which the proceeds are to be calculated, for the time 
from or at which and the manner in which any payments are to be made, for the making of adjustments 
between one financial year and another, and for any other incidental or ancillary matters. 
3
 [279A. Goods and Services TaxCouncil.—(1) The President shall, within sixty days from the date of 
commencement of the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, by order, constitute a 
Council to be called the Goods and Services Tax Council. 
(2) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall consist of the following members, namely:— 
(a) the Union Finance Minister—Chairperson; 
(b) the Union Minister of State in charge of Revenue or  Finance—Member ; 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixtieth Amendment) Act, 1988, s. 2, for ―two hundred and fifty rupees‖. (w.e.f. 20-12-1988). 
2. Proviso omitted by ibid.  
3. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 12 (w.e.f. 12-9-2016).   
119 
(c) the Minister in charge of Finance or Taxation or any other Minister nominated by each State 
Government—Members. 
(3) The Members of the Goods and Services Tax Council referred to in sub-clause (c) of clause (2) shall, 
as soon as may be, choose one amongst themselves to be the Vice-Chairperson of the Council for such 
period as they may decide. 
(4) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall make recommendations to the Union and the States on— 
(a) the taxes, cesses and surcharges levied by the Union, the States and the local bodies which may 
be subsumed in the goods and services tax; 
(b) the goods and services that may be subjected to, or exempted from the goods and services tax; 
(c) model Goods and Services Tax Laws, principles of levy, apportionment of Goods and Services 
Tax levied on supplies in the course of inter-State trade or commerce under article 269A and the 
principles that govern the place of supply; 
(d) the threshold limit of turnover below which goods and services may be exempted from goods 
and services tax; 
(e) the rates including floor rates with bands of goods and services tax ; 
(f) any special rate or rates for a specified period, to raise additional resources during any natural 
calamity or disaster ; 
(g) special provision with respect to the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu and Kashmir, 
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand; and 
(h) any other matter relating to the goods and services tax, as the Council may decide. 
(5) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall recommend the date on which the goods and services tax 
be levied on petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (commonly known as petrol), natural gas and 
aviation turbine fuel. 
(6) While discharging the functions conferred by this article, the Goods and Services Tax Council shall 
be guided by the need for a harmonised structure of goods and services tax and for the development of a 
harmonised national market for goods and services. 
(7) One-half of the total number of Members of the Goods and Services Tax Council shall constitute the 
quorum at its meetings. 
(8) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall determine the procedure in the performance of its 
functions. 
(9) Every decision of the Goods and Services Tax Council shall be taken at a meeting, by a majority of 
not less than three-fourths of the weighted votes of the members present and voting, in accordance with the 
following principles, namely:— 
(a) the vote of the Central Government shall have a weightage of one-third of the total votes cast, 
and 
(b) the votes of all the State Governments taken together shall have a weightage of two-thirds of the 
total votes cast, in that meeting. 
(10) No act or proceedings of the Goods and Services Tax Council shall be invalid merely by reason 
of— 
120 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the Council; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the Council; or 
(c) any procedural irregularity of the Council not affecting the merits of the case. 
(11) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall establish a mechanism to adjudicate any dispute— 
(a) between the Government of India and one or more States; or 
(b) between the Government of India and any State or States on one side and one or more other 
States on the other side; or 
(c) between two or more States, arising out of the recommendations of the Council or 
implementation thereof.] 
280. Finance Commission.—(1) The President shall, within two years from the commencement of this 
Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year or at such earlier time as the President 
considers necessary, by order constitute a Finance Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and four 
other members to be appointed by the President.   
(2) Parliament may by law determine the qualifications which shall be requisite for appointment as 
members of the Commission and the manner in which they shall be selected.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to the President as to—    
(a) the distribution between the Union and the States of the net proceeds of taxes which are to be, or 
may be, divided between them under this Chapter and the allocation between the States of the respective 
shares of such proceeds;   
(b) the principles which should govern the grants-in-aid of the revenues of the States out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India; 
1
 [(bb) the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the resources of 
the Panchayats in the State on the basis of the recommendations made by the Finance Commission of the 
State;] 
2
 [(c) the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the resources 
of the Municipalities in the State on the basis of the recommendations made by the Finance Commission 
of the State;] 
3
 [(d)] any other matter referred to the Commission by the President in the interests of sound finance. 
(4) The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall have such powers in the performance of 
their functions as Parliament may by law confer on them. 
281. Recommendations of the Finance Commission.—The President shall cause every 
recommendation made by the Finance Commission under the provisions of this Constitution together with 
an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
Miscellaneous Financial Provisions 
282. Expenditure defrayable by the Union or a State out of its revenues.—The Union or a State may 
make any grants for any public purpose, notwithstanding that the purpose is not one with respect to which 
Parliament or the Legislature of the State, as the case may be, may make laws. 
1.  Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3 (w.e.f. 24-4-1993). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-6-1993).  
3. Sub-clause (c) re-lettered as sub-clause(d) by ibid.  
121 
283. Custody, etc., of Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and moneys credited to the public 
accounts.—(1)The custody of the Consolidated Fund of India and the Contingency Fund of India, the 
payment of moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of public moneys 
other than those credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of the Government of India, their payment 
into the public account of India and the withdrawal of moneys from such account and all other matters 
connected with or ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law made by Parliament, and, until 
provision in that behalf is so made, shall be regulated by rules made by the President.  
(2) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of a State and the Contingency Fund of a State, the payment 
of moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of public moneys other than 
those credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of the Government of the State, their payment into the 
public account of the State and the withdrawal of moneys from such account and all other matters connected 
with or ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law made by the Legislature of the State, and, 
until provision in that behalf is so made, shall be regulated by rules made by the Governor 1*** of the State. 
284. Custody of suitors’ deposits and other moneys received by public servants and courts.—All 
moneys received by or deposited with— 
(a) any officer employed in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State in his capacity as 
such, other than revenues or public moneys raised or received by the Government of India or the 
Government of the State, as the case may be, or 
(b) any court within the territory of India to the credit of any cause, matter, account or persons, 
shall be paid into the public account of India or the public account of State, as the case may be. 
285. Exemption of property of the Union from State taxation.—(1) The property of the Union shall, 
save in so far as Parliament may by law otherwise provide, be exempt from all taxes imposed by a State or 
by any authority within a State. 
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall, until Parliament by law otherwise provides, prevent any authority within 
a State from levying any tax on any property of the Union to which such property was immediately before 
the commencement of this Constitution liable or treated as liable, so long as that tax continues to be levied in 
that State. 
286. Restrictions as to imposition of tax on the sale or purchase of goods.—(1)  No law of a State 
shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax on2[the supply of goods or of services or both, where such 
supply takes place]— 
(a) outside the State; or 
(b) in the course of the import of the 3[goods or services or both]into, or export of the 3[goods or 
services or both]out of, the territory of India. 
4
 *  
5
 *    
*                     
*     
* 
[(2) Parliament may by law formulate principles for determining when a 6[supply of goods or of services 
or both]in any of the ways mentioned in clause (1).] 
1. The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,  s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 13(i)(A), for the words "the sale or purchase of 
goods where such sale or purchase takes place" (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).   
3. Subs. by  s. 13(i)(B), ibid., for the words ―goods‖.   
4. Explanation to cl. (1) omitted by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 4 (w.e.f. 11-9-1956).   
5. Subs. by ibid. for cls. (2) and (3).  
6. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 13(ii), for the words ―sale or purchase of goods takes 
place‖ (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
122 
1
 *   
*  
*   
* 
*   
287. Exemption from taxes on electricity.—Save in so far as Parliament may by law otherwise 
provide, no law of a State shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax on the consumption or sale of 
electricity (whether produced by a Government or other persons) which is— 
(a) consumed by the Government of India, or sold to the Government of India for consumption by 
that Government; or 
(b) consumed in the construction, maintenance or operation of any railway by the Government of 
India or a railway company operating that railway, or sold to that Government or any such railway 
company for consumption in the construction, maintenance or operation of any railway, 
and any such law imposing, or authorising the imposition of, a tax on the sale of electricity shall secure that 
the price of electricity sold to the Government of India for consumption by that Government, or to any such 
railway company as aforesaid for consumption in the construction, maintenance or operation of any railway, 
shall be less by the amount of the tax than the price charged to other consumers of a substantial quantity of  
electricity. 
288. Exemption from taxation by States in respect of water or electricity in certain cases.—(1)Save 
in so far as the President may by order otherwise provide, no law of a State in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax in respect of any water 
or electricity stored, generated, consumed, distributed or sold by any authority established by any existing 
law or any law made by Parliament for regulating or developing any inter-State river or river-valley. 
Explanation.—The expression ―law of a State in force‖ in this clause shall include a law of a State 
passed or made before the commencement of this Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding 
that it or parts of it may not be then in operation either at all or in particular areas. 
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law impose, or authorise the imposition of, any such tax as is 
mentioned in clause (1), but no such law shall have any effect unless it has, after having been reserved for 
the consideration of the President, received his assent; and if any such law provides for the fixation of the 
rates and other incidents of such tax by means of rules or orders to be made under the law by any authority, 
the law shall provide for the previous consent of the President being obtained to the making of any such rule 
or order. 
289. Exemption of property and income of a State from Union taxation.—(1) The property and 
income of a State shall be exempt from Union taxation. 
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the Union from imposing, or authorising the imposition of, any 
tax to such extent, if any, as Parliament may by law provide in respect of a trade or business of any kind 
carried on by, or on behalf of, the Government of a State, or any operations connected therewith, or any 
property used or occupied for the purposes of such trade or business, or any income accruing or arising in 
connection therewith. 
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall apply to any trade or business, or to any class of trade or business, which 
Parliament may by law declare to be incidental to the ordinary functions of Government. 
290. Adjustment in respect of certain expenses and pensions.—Where under the provisions of this 
Constitution the expenses of any court or Commission, or the pension payable to or in respect of a person 
who has served before the commencement of this Constitution under the Crown in India or after such 
commencement in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State, are charged on the Consolidated 
Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State, then, if— 
1. Cl. (3) omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 13(iii) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
123 
(a) in the case of a charge on the Consolidated Fund of India, the court or Commission serves any of 
the separate needs of a State, or the person has served wholly or in part in connection with the affairs of 
a State; or 
(b) in the case of a charge on the Consolidated Fund of a State, the court or  Commission serves any 
of the separate needs of the Union or another State, or the person has served wholly or  in part in 
connection with the affairs of the Union or another State, 
there shall be charged on and paid  out of the Consolidated Fund of the State or, as the case may be, the 
Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of the other State, such contribution in respect of the 
expenses or pension as may be agreed, or as may in default of agreement be determined by an arbitrator to 
be appointed by the Chief Justice of India. 
1
 [290A. Annual payment to certain Devaswom Funds.—A sum of forty-six lakhs and fifty thousand 
rupees shall be charged on, and paid out of, the Consolidated Fund of the State of Kerala every year to the 
Travancore Devaswom Fund; and a sum of thirteen lakhs and fifty thousand rupees shall be charged on, and 
paid out of, the Consolidated Fund of the State of 2[Tamil Nadu] every year to the Devaswom Fund 
established in that State for the maintenance of Hindu temples and shrines in the territories transferred to that 
State on the 1st day of November, 1956, from the State of Travancore-Cochin.] 
291. [Privy purse sums of Rulers.].–Omitted by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act,1971,s. 2 
(w.e.f. 28-12-1971). 
CHAPTER II.—BORROWING 
292. Borrowing by the Government of India.—The executive power of the Union extends to 
borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of India within such limits, if any, as may from time 
to time be fixed by Parliament by law and to the giving of guarantees within such limits, if any, as may be so 
fixed. 
293. Borrowing by States.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this article, the executive power of a State 
extends to borrowing within the territory of India upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the State 
within such limits, if any, as may from time to time be fixed by the Legislature of such State by law and to  the 
giving of guarantees within such limits, if any, as may be so fixed. 
(2) The Government of India may, subject to such conditions as may be laid down by or under any law 
made by Parliament, make loans to any State or, so long as any limits fixed under article 292 are not 
exceeded, give guarantees in respect of loans raised by any State, and any sums required for the purpose of 
making such loans shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. 
(3) A State may not without the consent of the Government of India raise any loan if there is still 
outstanding any part of a loan which has been made to the State by the Government of India or by its 
predecessor Government, or in respect of which a guarantee has been given by the Government of India or 
by its predecessor Government. 
(4) A consent under clause (3) may be granted subject to such conditions, if any, as the Government of 
India may think fit to impose. 
CHAPTER III.—PROPERTY, CONTRACTS, RIGHTS, LIABILITIES, 
OBLIGATIONS AND SUITS 
294. Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in certain cases.—As from the 
commencement of this Constitution— 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968 (53 of 1968), s. 4, for ―Madras‖ (w.e.f. 14-1-1969).  
124 
(a) all property and assets which immediately before such commencement were vested in His 
Majesty for the purposes of the Government of the Dominion of India and all property and assets which 
immediately before such commencement were vested in His Majesty for the purposes of the 
Government of each Governor‘s Province shall vest respectively in the Union and the corresponding 
State, and 
(b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of the Dominion of India and of the 
Government of each Governor's Province, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the 
rights, liabilities and obligations respectively of the Government of India and the Government of each 
corresponding State, 
subject to any adjustment made or to be made by reason of the creation before the commencement of this 
Constitution of the Dominion of Pakistan or of the Provinces of West Bengal, East Bengal, West Punjab and 
East Punjab. 
295. Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in other cases.—(1)As from the 
commencement of this Constitution— 
(a) all property and assets which immediately before such commencement were vested in any Indian 
State corresponding to a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule shall vest in the Union, if the 
purposes for which such property and assets were held immediately before such commencement will 
thereafter be purposes of the Union relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List, and 
(b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of any Indian State corresponding to a State 
specified in Part B of the First Schedule, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the rights, 
liabilities and obligations of the Government of India, if the purposes for which such rights were acquired or 
liabilities or obligations were incurred before such commencement will thereafter be purposes of the 
Government of India relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List, 
subject to any agreement entered into in that behalf by the Government of India with the Government of that 
State. 
(2) Subject as aforesaid, the Government of each State specified in Part B of the First Schedule shall, as 
from the commencement of this Constitution, be the successor of the Government of the corresponding Indian 
State as regards all property and assets and all rights, liabilities and obligations, whether arising out of any 
contract or otherwise, other than those referred to in clause (1). 
296. Property accruing by escheat or lapse or as bona vacantia.—Subject as hereinafter provided, any 
property in the territory of India which, if this Constitution had not come into operation, would have accrued to 
His Majesty or, as the case may be, to the Ruler of an Indian State by escheat or lapse, or as bona vacantia for 
want of a rightful owner, shall, if it is property situate in a State, vest in such State, and shall, in any other case, 
vest in the Union: 
Provided that any property which at the date when it would have so accrued to His Majesty or to the 
Ruler of an Indian State was in the possession or under the control of the Government of India or the 
Government of a State shall, according as the purposes for which it was then used or held were purposes of 
the Union or of a State, vest in the Union or in that State. 
Explanation.—In this article, the expressions ―Ruler‖ and ―Indian State‖ have the same meanings as in 
article 363. 
1
 [297. Things of value within territorial waters or continental shelf and resources of the exclusive 
economic zone to vest in the Union.—(1) All lands, minerals and other things of value underlying the 
ocean within the territorial waters, or the continental shelf, or the exclusive economic zone, of India shall 
vest in the Union and be held for the purposes of the Union. 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Fortieth Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).  
125 
(2) All other resources of the exclusive economic zone of India shall also vest in the Union and be held 
for the purposes of the Union. 
(3) The limits of the territorial waters, the continental shelf, the exclusive economic zone, and other 
maritime zones, of India shall be such as may be specified, from time to time, by or under any law made by 
Parliament.] 
1
 [298. Power to carry on trade, etc.— The executive power of the Union and of each State shall extend 
to the carrying on of any trade or business and to the acquisition, holding and disposal of property and the 
making of contracts for any purpose: 
Provided that— 
(a) the said executive power of the Union shall, in so far as such trade or business or such purpose is 
not one with respect to which Parliament may make laws, be subject in each State to legislation by the 
State; and 
(b) the said executive power of each State shall, in so far as such trade or business or such purpose is 
not one with respect to which the State Legislature may make laws, be subject to legislation by 
Parliament.] 
299. Contracts.—(1) All contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of the Union or of a 
State shall be expressed to be made by the President, or by the Governor2*** of the State, as the case may 
be, and all such contracts and all assurances of property made in the exercise of that power shall be executed 
on behalf of the President or the Governor1*** by such persons and in such manner as he may direct or 
authorise. 
(2) Neither the President nor the Governor3*** shall be personally liable in respect of any contract or 
assurance made or executed for the purposes of this Constitution, or for the purposes of any enactment 
relating to the Government of India heretofore in force, nor shall any person making or executing any such 
contract or assurance on behalf of any of them be personally liable in respect thereof. 
300. Suits and proceedings.—(1) The Government of India may sue or be sued by the name of the 
Union of India and the Government of a State may sue or be sued by the name of the State and may, subject 
to any provisions which may be made by Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of such State enacted by 
virtue of powers conferred by this Constitution, sue or be sued in relation to their respective affairs in the 
like cases as the Dominion of India and the corresponding Provinces or the corresponding Indian States 
might have sued or been sued if this Constitution had not been enacted. 
(2) If at the commencement of this Constitution—  
(a) any legal proceedings are pending to which the Dominion of India is a party, the Union of India 
shall be deemed to be substituted for the Dominion in those proceedings; and 
(b) any legal proceedings are pending to which a Province or an Indian State is a party, the 
corresponding State shall be deemed to be substituted for the Province or the Indian State in those 
proceedings.  
4
 [CHAPTER IV.—RIGHT TO PROPERTY 
300A. Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of law.—No person shall be 
deprived of his property save by authority of law.] 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. The words ―or the Rajpramukh‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
3. The words ―nor the Rajpramukh‖ omitted by ibid. 
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 34 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
126 
PART XIII 
TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE WITHIN THE 
TERRITORY OF INDIA 
301. Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse.—Subject to the other provisions of this Part,   
trade, commerce  and intercourse throughout  the territory of India shall be free. 
302. Power of Parliament to impose  restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse.—Parliament 
may  by law impose such restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse between one State 
and another or within any part of the territory of India  as may be required in the public interest. 
303. Restrictions on the legislative powers of the Union and of the States with regard to trade  and 
commerce.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in article 302, neither Parliament nor the Legislature of a State 
shall have power to make any law giving, or authorising the giving of, any preference to one State over 
another, or making, or authorising the making of, any discrimination  between one State and another, by 
virtue of any entry relating to trade  and commerce in any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule. 
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent Parliament from making any law giving, or authorising  the 
giving of, any preference or making, or authorising the making of, any discrimination if it is declared by 
such law that it is necessary to do so for the purpose of dealing with a situation arising from scarcity of 
goods in any part of the territory of India. 
304.Restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse among States.—Notwithstanding anything in 
article 301 or article 303, the Legislature of a State may by law— 
(a) impose on goods imported from other States 1[or the Union territories] any tax to which similar 
goods manufactured or produced in that State are subject, so, however, as not to discriminate between 
goods so imported and goods so manufactured or produced; and 
(b) impose such reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse with or 
within that State as may be required in the public interest: 
Provided that no Bill or amendment for the purposes of clause (b) shall be introduced or moved in the 
Legislature of a State without the previous sanction of the President. 
2
 [305. Saving of existing laws and laws providing for State monopolies.—Nothing in articles 301 and 
303  shall affect  the provisions of any existing law except in so far  as the President may by order otherwise 
direct; and nothing in article 301 shall affect the operation  of any law made before the commencement of 
the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, in so far as it  relates to, or prevent Parliament or the 
Legislature of a State from making any law relating to, any such matter as is referred to in sub-clause (ii) of 
clause (6) of article 19.] 
306. [Power  of  certain  States  in  Part B  of  the  First  Schedule to impose  restrictions  on  trade  and  
commerce.].–Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
307. Appointment of authority for carrying out the purposes of articles 301 to 304.—Parliament 
may by law appoint such  authority as it considers appropriate for carrying out the purposes  of articles 301, 
302, 303 and 304, and confer on the  authority so appointed such powers and such duties as it thinks 
necessary. 
1.Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s.29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 4, for art. 305 (w.e.f. 27-4-1955). 
127 
PART XIV 
SERVICES UNDER THE UNION AND THE STATES 
CHAPTER I.—SERVICES 
308. Interpretation.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, the expression ―State‖ 1[does 
not include the State of Jammu and  Kashmir.] 
309. Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the Union or a State.—Subject to the 
provisions of this Constitution, Acts of the appropriate Legislature may regulate the recruitment, and 
conditions of service of persons appointed, to public services and posts in connection with the affairs  of the 
Union or of any State: 
Provided that it shall be competent for the President or such person as he may direct in the case of 
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union, and for the Governor2*** of a State or such 
person as he may direct in the case of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the  State, to make  
rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service  of persons appointed, to such services and 
posts until provision in that behalf is made by or under an Act of the appropriate Legislature under this 
article, and any rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any such Act. 
310. Tenure of office of persons serving the Union or a State.—(1) Except as expressly provided by 
this Constitution,  every person who is a member of a  defence service or of  a civil service of the Union or 
of an all-India service or holds any post connected with defence or any civil post under the Union holds 
office during the pleasure of the President, and  every  person who is  a member of a civil service of a State 
or holds any civil post under a State holds office  during  the pleasure of the Governor3*** of the State. 
(2) Notwithstanding that a person holding a civil post under the Union or a State holds office during the 
pleasure of the President or, as the case may be, of the Governor1***  of the State, any contract under which 
a person, not being a member of a defence service or of an all-India service or of a civil service of the Union 
or a State, is appointed under this Constitution to hold such a post may, if the President or the Governor4***, 
as the case may be, deems it necessary in order to secure the services  of a person having special 
qualifications, provide  for the payment to him of  compensation, if before the expiration of an agreed period 
that post is abolished or he is, for reasons not connected with any misconduct on  his part, required to vacate 
that post. 
311. Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in civil capacities under the 
Union or a State.—(1) No person who is a member of a civil service of the  Union or an all-India service or 
a civil service of a  State or holds a civil post under  the Union or a State shall be dismissed or removed by 
an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.  
5
 [(2) No such person  as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an 
inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable  opportunity of 
being heard in respect of those charges6***: 
7
 [Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose upon him any such penalty, such 
penalty may be imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be 
necessary to give such person any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed: 
Provided further that this clause shall not apply—] 
(a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has 
led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for ―means a State specified in Part A or Part B of the 
First Schedule‖ (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2.The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
3.The words ―or, as the case may be, the Rajpramukh‖ omitted by ibid. 
4. The words ―or the Rajpramukh‖ omitted by ibid. 
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 10, for cls. (2) and (3) (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).  
6. Certain words were omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 44 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
7. Subs. by ibid., for certain words. 
128 
(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in rank is 
satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not  reasonably practicable 
to hold such inquiry; or 
(c) where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of the 
security of the State it is not expedient to hold such inquiry. 
(3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to 
hold such inquiry as is referred to in clause (2), the decision thereon of the authority empowered to dismiss 
or remove such person  or to reduce him in rank shall be final.] 
312. All-India services.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in 1[Chapter VI of Part VI or Part XI], if the 
Council of States has declared by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present 
and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest so to do, Parliament may by law provide 
for the creation of one  or more all India services 2[(including  an all-India judicial service)] common to the 
Union and the States, and, subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, regulate the recruitment, and the 
conditions of service of persons appointed, to any such service. 
(2) The services known at the commencement of this Constitution as the Indian Administrative Service 
and the Indian Police Service shall be deemed to be services created by Parliament under this article. 
3
 [(3) The all-India judicial   service referred to in clause (1) shall not include any post inferior to that of a 
a district judge as defined in article 236. 
(4) The law providing for the creation of the all-India judicial service aforesaid may contain such 
provisions for the amendment of Chapter VI of Part VI as may be necessary for giving effect to the 
provisions of that law and no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the 
purposes of article 368.] 
4
 [312A. Power of Parliament to vary or revoke conditions of service of officers of certain 
services.—(1) Parliament may by law— 
(a) vary or revoke, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the conditions of services as respects 
remuneration, leave and pension and the rights as respects disciplinary matters of persons who, having 
been appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a civil service of the Crown 
in India before the commencement  of this Constitution, continue on and after the commencement  of the 
Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972, to serve under the Government of India or of  a 
State in any service or post; 
(b) vary or revoke, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the conditions of service as respects 
pension of  persons who, having been appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in 
Council to a civil service of the Crown in India before the commencement of this Constitution, retired or 
otherwise ceased to be in service at any time before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty
eighth Amendment) Act, 1972: 
Provided that in the case of  any such person who is holding or has held the office  of the Chief 
Justice or  other Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court, the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India, the Chairman or other member of the Union  or a State Public Service Commission or the Chief 
Election Commissioner, nothing in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) shall be construed as empowering 
Parliament to vary or revoke, after his appointment  to such post, the conditions of his service to his 
disadvantage except in so far as such conditions of service are applicable to him by reason of his being  a 
person appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State  in Council to a civil service of the 
Crown in India. 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 45, for ―Part XI‖ (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).  
2.Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 45(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).  
3. Ins. by ibid. 
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972, s.2 (w.e.f. 29-08-1972).  
129 
(2) Except to the extent provided for by Parliament by law under this article, nothing in this article shall 
affect the power of  any Legislature or other authority under any other  provision of this Constitution to 
regulate the conditions  of service of persons referred to in clause (1). 
(3) Neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in— 
(a) any dispute arising out of any provision of, or any endorsement on, any covenant, agreement or 
other similar instrument which was entered into or executed by any person referred to in clause (1), or 
arising out of any letter issued to such person, in relation to his appointment to any civil service of the 
Crown in India or his continuance in service under the Government of the Dominion of India or a 
Province thereof; 
(b) any dispute in  respect of any right, liability or obligation under article 314 as originally enacted. 
(4) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything in article 314 as originally 
enacted or in any other provision of this Constitution.] 
313. Transitional provisions.—Until other provision is made in this behalf under this Constitution, all 
the laws in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution and applicable to any public 
service or any post which continues to exist after the commencement of this Constitution, as an all-India 
service or as service or post under the Union or a State shall continue in force so far as consistent with the 
provisions of this Constitution. 
314. 1[Provision for protection of existing officers of certain services.].–Omitted by the Constitution (Twenty
eighth Amendment) Act, 1972, s. 3  (w.e.f. 29-8-1972). 
CHAPTER II.—PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONS 
315. Public Service Commissions for the Union and for the States.—(1) Subject to the provisions of 
this article, there shall be a Public Service Commission for the Union and a Public Service Commission for 
each State. 
(2) Two or more States may agree that there shall be one Public Service Commission for that group of 
States, and if a resolution to that effect is passed by the House or, where there are two Houses, by each 
House of the Legislature of each of those States, Parliament may by law provide for the appointment of a 
Joint State Public Service Commission (referred to in this Chapter as Joint Commission) to serve the needs 
of those States. 
(3) Any such law as aforesaid may contain such incidental and consequential provisions as may be 
necessary or desirable for giving effect to the purposes of the law. 
(4) The Public Service Commission for the Union, if requested so to do by the Governor2*** of a State, 
may, with the approval of the President, agree to serve all or any of the needs  of the State. 
(5) References in this Constitution to the Union Public Service Commission or a State Public Service 
Commission shall, unless the context otherwise requires, be construed as references to the Commission  
serving the needs of the Union or, as the case may be, the State as respects the  particular matter  in question. 
316. Appointment and term of office of members.—(1) The Chairman and other members of  a Public 
Service Commission shall be appointed, in the case of the  Union Commission or a Joint Commission, by the 
President, and in the case of a State  Commission, by the Governor of the State: 
Provided that as nearly as may be one-half of the members of every Public Service Commission shall be 
persons who at the dates of their respective appointments have held office for at least ten  years either under  
the Government of India or under the Government of a State, and in computing the said period of ten years 
any period before the commencement of this Constitution during which a person has held office  under the 
Crown in India or under the Government of an  Indian State shall be included. 
3
 [(1A) If the office of the Chairman of the Commission becomes vacant or if any such Chairman is by 
1. The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 11 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963). 
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-first Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 2, for ―sixty years‖ (w.e.f. 7-9-1976). 
130 
reason of absence or for any other reason unable to perform the duties of his office, those  duties shall, until 
some person appointed under clause (1) to the vacant office has entered on the duties thereof or, as the case 
may be, until the Chairman has resumed his duties, be performed by such one  of the other members of the 
Commission  as  the President, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission,  and the 
Governor of the State in the case of a State Commission, may appoint  for the purpose.] 
(2) A member of a Public Service Commission shall hold office for a term of six years from the date on 
which he enters upon his office or until he attains, in the case of the Union Commission, the age of sixty-five 
years, and in the case of a State Commission or a Joint Commission, the age of 1[sixty-two years], whichever 
is earlier: 
Provided that— 
(a) a member of a Public Service Commission may, by writing  under his hand  addressed, in the 
case of the Union Commission  or a Joint Commission, to the President, and in the case of a State 
Commission, to the Governor2*** of the State, resign his office; 
(b) a member of a Public Service Commission may be removed from his  office in the manner 
provided in  clause (1) or clause (3) of article  317. 
(3) A person who holds office as a member of a Public Service Commission shall, on the expiration of 
his term of office, be ineligible for re-appointment to that office. 
317. Removal and suspension of a member of a Public Service Commission.—(1) Subject to the 
provisions of clause (3), the Chairman  or any other member of a Public Service Commission shall  only be 
removed from his office by order of the President on the ground of misbehaviour after the Supreme Court, 
on reference being made to it by the President, has, on inquiry held in accordance with the procedure 
prescribed in that behalf under article 145, reported that the Chairman or such other member, as the case may  
be, ought  on any such ground to be removed. 
(2) The President, in the case of the  Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and the Governor1*** 
in the case  of a State Commission, may suspend from office the Chairman  or any other member of the 
Commission in  respect of whom a reference  has been made to the Supreme Court under clause (1) until the 
President has passed orders on receipt  of the report of the Supreme Court on such reference. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), the President may by order remove from office the Chairman 
or any other member of a Public Service Commission if the Chairman or  such other member, as the case 
may be,— 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or 
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or 
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or 
body. 
(4) If the Chairman or any other member of  a Public Service Commission is or becomes in any way 
concerned or interested in any contract or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of India or the  
Government of a State or participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or emolument arising 
therefrom otherwise than as a member and in common with  the other members of an incorporated company, 
he shall, for the purposes of clause (1), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour. 
318. Power to make regulations as to conditions of service of members and staff of the 
Commission.—In the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, the President and, in the case 
of a State Commission, the Governor 1*** of the  State may by regulations— 
1. The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,  s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
131 
(a) determine the number of members of the Commission and their conditions of service; and 
(b) make provision with respect to the number of members of the staff of the Commission and their 
conditions of service: 
Provided that the conditions of service of a member of a Public Service Commission shall not be 
varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. 
319. Prohibition as to the holding of offices by members of Commission on ceasing to be such 
members.—On ceasing to hold office— 
(a) the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission shall be ineligible for further 
employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a State; 
(b) the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission shall be eligible for appointment as the 
Chairman or any other member of the Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of any 
other State Public Service Commission, but not for any other employment either under the Government 
of India or under the Government of a State; 
(c) a member other than the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission shall be eligible for 
appointment as the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of a State 
Public Service Commission, but not for any other employment either under the Government of India or 
under the Government of a State; 
(d) a member other than the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission shall be eligible for 
appointment as the Chairman or any other member of the Union Public Service Commission or as the 
Chairman of that or any other State Public Service Commission, but not for any other employment either 
under the Government of India or under the Government of a State. 
320. Functions of Public Service Commissions.—(1) It shall be the duty of the Union and the State 
Public Service Commissions to conduct examinations for appointments to the services of the Union and the 
services of the State respectively. 
(2) It shall also be the duty of the Union Public Service Commission, if requested by any two or more 
States so to do, to assist those States in framing and operating schemes of joint recruitment for any services 
for which candidates possessing special qualifications are required. 
(3) The Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission, as the case may be, 
shall be consulted— 
(a) on all matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil services and for civil posts; 
(b) on the principles to be followed in making appointments to civil services and posts and in 
making promotions and transfers from one service to another and on the suitability of candidates for 
such appointments, promotions or transfers; 
(c) on all disciplinary matters affecting a person serving under the Government of India or the 
Government of a State in a civil capacity, including memorials or petitions relating to such matters; 
(d) on  any claim by or in respect of a person who is serving or has served under the Government of 
India or the Government of a State or under the Crown in India or under the Government of an Indian 
State, in a civil capacity, that any costs incurred by him in defending legal proceedings instituted against 
him in respect of acts done or purporting to be done in the execution of his duty should be paid out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India, or, as the case may be, out of the Consolidated Fund of the State; 
(e) on any claim for the award of a pension in respect of injuries sustained by a person while serving 
under the Government of India or the Government of a State or under the Crown in India or under the 
Government of an Indian State, in a civil capacity, and any question as to the amount of any such award, 
and it shall be the duty of a Public Service Commission to advise on any matter so referred to them and on 
132 
any other matter which the President, or, as the case may be, the Governor1*** of the State, may refer to 
them: 
Provided that the President as respects the all-India services and also as respects other services and posts 
in connection with the affairs of the Union, and the Governor2***, as respects other services and posts in 
connection with the affairs of a State, may make regulations specifying the matters in which either generally, 
or in any particular class of case or in any particular circumstances, it shall not be necessary for a Public 
Service Commission to be consulted. 
(4) Nothing in clause (3) shall require a Public Service Commission to be consulted as respects the 
manner in which any provision referred to in clause (4) of article 16 may be made or as respects the manner 
in which effect may be given to the provisions of article 335. 
(5) All regulations made under the proviso to clause (3) by the President or the Governor 1*** of a State 
shall be laid for not less than fourteen days before each House of Parliament or the House or each House of 
the Legislature of the State, as the case may be, as soon as possible after they are made, and shall be subject 
to such modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as both Houses of Parliament or the House 
or both Houses of the Legislature of the State may make during the session in which they are so laid. 
321. Power to extend functions of Public Service Commissions.—An Act made by Parliament or, as 
the case may be, the Legislature of a State may provide for the exercise of additional functions by the Union 
Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission as respects the services of the Union or 
the State and also as respects the services of any local authority or other body corporate constituted by law or 
of any public institution. 
322. Expenses of Public Service Commissions.—The expenses of the Union or a State Public Service 
Commission, including any salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the members or 
staff of the Commission, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or, as the case may be, the 
Consolidated Fund of the State. 
323. Reports of Public Service Commissions.—(1) It shall be the duty of the Union Commission to 
present annually to the President a report as to the work done by the Commission and on receipt of such 
report the President shall cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining, as respects the 
cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such non-acceptance to 
be laid before each House of Parliament. 
(2) It shall be the duty of a State Commission to present annually to the Governor1*** of the State a 
report as to the work done by the Commission, and it shall be the duty of a Joint Commission to present 
annually to the Governor2***  of each of the States the needs of which are served by the Joint Commission a 
report as to the work done by the Commission in relation to that State, and in either case the Governor1***, 
shall, on receipt of such report, cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining, as respects the 
cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such non-acceptance to 
be laid before the Legislature of the State. 
3
 [PART  XIVA 
TRIBUNALS 
323A. Administrative tribunals.—(1) Parliament may, by law, provide for the adjudication or trial by 
administrative tribunals of disputes and complaints  with respect to  recruitment and  conditions of service of 
1. The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,  s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. The words ―or Rajpramukh, as the case may be‖ omitted by ibid. 
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 46 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
133 
persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State        
or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of  
India or of any corporation owned or controlled by the Government. 
(2) A law made under clause (1) may— 
(a) provide for the establishment of an administrative tribunal for the Union and a separate 
administrative tribunal for each State or for two or more States; 
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for contempt) and authority 
which may be exercised by each of the said tribunals; 
(c) provide for the procedure (including provisions as to limitation and rules of evidence) to be 
followed by the said tribunals; 
(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article 
136, with respect to the disputes or complaints referred to in clause (1); 
(e) provide for the transfer to each such administrative tribunal of any cases pending before any 
court or other authority immediately before the establishment of such tribunal as would have been within 
the jurisdiction of such tribunal if the causes of action on which such suits or proceedings are based had 
arisen after such establishment; 
(f) repeal or amend any order made by the President under clause (3) of article 371D; 
(g) contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions (including provisions as to 
fees) as Parliament may deem necessary for the effective functioning of, and for the speedy disposal of 
cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of, such tribunals. 
(3) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything in any other provision of this 
Constitution or in any other law for the time being in force. 
323B. Tribunals for other matters.—(1) The appropriate Legislature may, by law, provide for the 
adjudication or trial by tribunals of any disputes, complaints, or offences with respect to all or any of the 
matters specified in clause (2) with respect to which such Legislature has power to make laws. 
(2) The matters referred to in clause (1) are the following, namely:— 
(a) levy, assessment, collection and enforcement of any tax; 
(b) foreign exchange, import and export across customs frontiers; 
(c) industrial and labour disputes; 
(d) land reforms by way of acquisition by the State of any estate as defined in article 31A or of any 
rights therein or the extinguishment or modification of any such rights or by way of ceiling on 
agricultural land or in any other way; 
(e) ceiling on urban property; 
(f) elections to either House of Parliament or the House or either House of the Legislature of a State, 
but excluding the matters referred to in article 329 and article 329A; 
(g) production, procurement, supply and distribution of food-stuffs (including edible oilseeds and 
oils) and such other goods as the President may, by public notification, declare to be essential goods for 
the purpose of this article and control of prices of such goods; 
1
 [(h) rent, its regulation and control and tenancy issues including the right, title and interest of 
landlords and tenants;] 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment) Act, 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).  
134 
1
 [(i)] offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to 2[(h)] 
and fees in respect of any of those matters; 
2
 [(j)] any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to 3[(i)]. 
(3) A law made under clause (1) may— 
(a) provide for the establishment of a hierarchy of tribunals; 
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for contempt) and authority 
which may be exercised by each of the said tribunals; 
(c) provide for the procedure (including provisions as to limitation and rules of evidence) to be 
followed by the said tribunals; 
(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article 
136, with respect to all or any of the matters falling within the jurisdiction of the said tribunals; 
(e) provide for the transfer to each such tribunal of any cases pending before any court or any other 
authority immediately before the establishment of such tribunal as would have been within the 
jurisdiction of such tribunal if the causes of action on which such suits or proceedings are based had 
arisen after such establishment; 
(f) contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions (including provisions as to 
fees) as the appropriate Legislature may deem necessary for the effective functioning of, and for  the 
speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of, such tribunals. 
(4) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding anything in any other provision of this 
Constitution or in any other law for the time being in force. 
Explanation.—In this article, ―appropriate Legislature‖, in relation to any matter, means Parliament or, 
as the case may be, a State Legislature competent to make laws with respect to such matter in accordance 
with the provisions of Part XI.] 
PART XV 
ELECTIONS 
324. Superintendence, direction and control of elections to be vested in an Election Commission.—
 (1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of the electoral rolls for, and the conduct 
of, all elections to Parliament and to the Legislature of every State and of elections to the offices of President 
and Vice-President held under this Constitution 4*** shall be vested in a Commission (referred to in this 
Constitution as the Election Commission). 
(2) The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election Commissioner and such number of other 
Election Commissioners, if any, as the President may from time to time fix and the appointment of the Chief 
Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall, subject to the provisions of any law made in 
that behalf by Parliament, be made by the President. 
(3) When any other Election Commissioner is so appointed the Chief Election Commissioner shall act as 
the Chairman of the Election Commission. 
(4) Before each general election to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly of each 
State, and before the first general election and thereafter before each biennial election to the Legislative 
Council of each  State  having such  Council,  the  President  may  also  appoint  after  consultation  with  the  
1.Sub-clause (h) and (i) re-lettered as (i) and (j) by the Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment) Act, 1993, s.2 (w.e.f. 15-5-1994). 
2. Subs. by ibid., for ―(g)‖.  
3.Subs. by ibid., for ―(h)‖.  
4.The words ―including the appointment of election tribunals for the decision of doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection 
with elections to parliament and to the Legislatures of States‖ omitted by the Constitution (Nineteenth Amendment) Act, 1966,      
s. 2 (w.e.f. 11-12-1966). 
135 
Election Commission such Regional Commissioners as he may consider necessary to assist the Election 
Commission in the performance of the functions conferred on the Commission by clause (1). 
(5) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the conditions of service and tenure of office 
of the Election Commissioners and the Regional Commissioners shall be such as the President may by rule 
determine: 
Provided that the Chief Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except in like 
manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court and the conditions of service of the Chief 
Election Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment: 
Provided further that any other Election Commissioner or a Regional Commissioner shall not be 
removed from office except on the recommendation of the Chief Election Commissioner. 
(6) The President, or the Governor1*** of a State, shall, when so requested by the Election Commission, 
make available to the Election Commission or to a Regional Commissioner such staff as may be necessary 
for the discharge of the functions conferred on the Election Commission by clause (1). 
325. No person to be ineligible for inclusion in, or to claim to be included in a special, electoral roll 
on grounds of religion, race, caste or sex.—There shall be one general electoral roll for every territorial 
constituency for election to either House of Parliament or to the House or either House of the Legislature of 
a State and no person shall be ineligible for inclusion in any such roll or claim to be included in any special 
electoral roll for any such constituency on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex or any of them. 
326. Elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of States to be on the 
basis of adult suffrage.—The elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly of every 
State shall be on the basis of adult suffrage; that is to say, every person who is a citizen of India and who is 
not less than 2[eighteen years] of age on such date as may be fixed in that behalf by or under any law made 
by the appropriate Legislature and is not otherwise disqualified under this Constitution or any law made by 
the appropriate Legislature on the ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal 
practice, shall be entitled to be registered as a voter at any such election.   
327. Power of Parliament to make provision with respect to elections to Legislatures.—Subject to 
the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may from time to time by law make provision with respect to 
all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to either House of Parliament or to the House or either 
House of the Legislature of a State including the preparation of electoral rolls, the delimitation of 
constituencies and all other matters necessary for securing  the due constitution of such House or Houses. 
328. Power of Legislature of a State to make provision with respect to elections to such 
Legislature.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and in so far as provision in that behalf is not 
made by Parliament, the Legislature of a State may from time to time by law make provision with respect to 
all matters relating to, or in  connection with, the elections to the House or either House of the Legislature of 
the State including the preparation of electoral rolls and all other matters necessary for securing the due 
constitution of such House or Houses. 
329. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.—3[Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution 4***—] 
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to 
such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 327 or article 328, shall not be called in 
question in any court; 
1. The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,  s.29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-first Amendment) Act, 1988, s. 2,for ―twenty-one years‖ (w.e.f. 28-3-1989). 
3.Subs, by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 10-8-1975).  
4.The words, figures and letters ―but subject to the provisions of article 329A‖ omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth 
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 35 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
136 
(b) no election to either House of Parliament or to the House or either House of the Legislature of a 
State shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such 
manner as may be provided for by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature. 
1
 [329A. [Special provision as to elections to Parliament in the case of Prime Minister and Speaker.]
Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 36 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
1
 *   
*   
*   
PART  XVI 
*            
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN CLASSES 
* 
330. Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People.—
 (1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the People for — 
(a) the Scheduled Castes; 
2
 [(b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam; and] 
(c) the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam. 
(2) The number of seats reserved in any State 3[or Union territory] for the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of 
seats allotted to that State 2[or Union territory] in the House of the People as the population of the Scheduled 
Castes in the State 2[or Union territory] or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State 2[or Union territory] or part of 
the State or Union territory, as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total 
population of the State 2[or Union territory]. 
4
 [(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (2), the number of seats reserved in the House of the 
People for the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam shall bear to the total number of seats 
allotted to that State a proportion not less than the population of the Scheduled Tribes in the said 
autonomous districts bears to the total population of the State.] 
5
 [Explanation.—In this article and in article 332, the expression ―population‖ means the population as 
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published: 
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of which the relevant figures 
have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 6[2026] have 
been published, be construed as a reference to the 7[2001] census.] 
331. Representation of the Anglo-Indian Community in the House of the People.—Notwithstanding 
anything in article 81, the President may, if he is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian community is not 
adequately represented in the House of the People, nominate not more than two members of that community 
to the House of the People. 
8
 332. Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative   
Assemblies of the States.—(1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes,           
[except the  Scheduled  Tribes in the autonomous  districts of Assam], in the  Legislative Assembly of every  
every  
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 4 and Rep. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 
1978, s. 36 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-first Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2, for sub-clause (b) (w.e.f. 16-6-1986).      
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).  
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-first Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 17-10-1973).  
5. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 47 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
6. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 6, for ―2000‖ (w.e.f. 21-2-2001).   
7. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 5 for ―1991‖ (w.e.f. 22-6-2003).  
8. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-first Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f.16-6-1986).  
137 
State 1***. 
(2) Seats shall be reserved also for the autonomous districts in the Legislative Assembly of the State of 
Assam.   
(3) The number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative 
Assembly of any State under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total 
number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled 
Tribes in the State or part of the State, as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to 
the total population of the State. 
2
 [(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until the taking effect, under article 170, of the 
re-adjustment, on the basis of the first census after the year 3[2026], of the number of seats in the Legislative 
Assemblies of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland, the seats which shall be 
reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any such State shall be,— 
(a) if all the seats in the Legislative Assembly of such State in existence on the date of coming into 
force of the Constitution (Fifty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1987 (hereafter in this clause referred to as the 
existing Assembly) are held by members of the Scheduled Tribes, all the seats except one; 
(b) in any other case, such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats, a proportion not less 
than the number (as on the said date) of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the existing 
Assembly bears to the total number of seats in the existing Assembly.] 
4
 [(3B) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until the re-adjustment, under article 170, takes 
takes effect on the basis of the first census after the year 5[2026], of the number of seats in the Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Tripura, the seats which shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the 
Legislative Assembly shall be, such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats, a proportion  not 
less than the number, as on the date of coming into force of the Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) 
Act, 1992, of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly in existence on the 
said date bears to the total number of seats in that Assembly.] 
(4) The number of seats reserved for an autonomous district in the Legislative Assembly of the State of 
Assam shall bear to the total number of seats in that Assembly a proportion not less than the population of 
the district bears to the total population of the State. 
(5) The constituencies for the seats reserved for any autonomous district of Assam shall not comprise 
any area outside that district 6***. 
(6) No person who is not a member of a Scheduled Tribe of any autonomous district of the State of 
Assam shall be eligible for election to the Legislative Assembly of the State from any constituency of that 
district 5***: 
7
 [Provided that for elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam, the representation of the 
Scheduled Tribes and non-Scheduled Tribes in the constituencies included in the Bodoland Territorial Areas 
District, so notified, and existing prior to the constitution of Bodoland Territorial Areas District, shall         
be maintained.] 
1. The words and letters ―specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956,  s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1987, s. 2  (w.e.f. 21-9-1987) 
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 7, for ―2000‖ (w.e.f. 21-2-2002). 
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5-12-1992).  
5.  Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty- fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 7 for ―2000‖ (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).  
6. Certain words omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).  
7. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninetieth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28-9-2003). 
138 
333. Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the Legislative Assemblies of the States.—
 Notwithstanding anything in article 170, the Governor1*** of a State may, if he is of opinion that the Anglo
Indian community needs representation in the Legislative Assembly of the State and is not adequately 
represented therein, 2[nominate one member of that community to the Assembly]. 
334. 3 [Reservation of seats and special representation to cease after certain period].—
 Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the provisions of this Constitution relating 
to— 
(a) the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the House of the 
People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States; and 
(b) the representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of  the People and in the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States by  nomination, 
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of 4[eighty years in respect of clause (a) and seventy 
years in respect of clause (b)] from the commencement of this Constitution: 
Provided that nothing in this article shall affect any representation in the House of the People or in the 
Legislative Assembly of a State until the dissolution of the then existing House or Assembly, as the case 
may be.  
335. Claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to services and posts.—The claims of the 
members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently 
with the maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the making of appointments to services and posts in 
connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State: 
5
 [Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent in making of any provision in favour of the members of 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for relaxation in qualifying marks in any examination or lowering 
the standards of evaluation, for reservation in matters or promotion to any class or classes of services or posts in 
connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State.] 
336. Special provision for Anglo-Indian community in certain services.—(1) During the first two years 
after the commencement of this Constitution, appointments of members of the Anglo-Indian community to 
posts in the railway, customs, postal and telegraph services of the Union shall be made on the same basis as 
immediately before the fifteenth day of August, 1947. 
During every succeeding period of two years, the number of posts reserved for the members of the said 
community in the said services shall, as nearly as possible, be less by ten per cent. than the numbers so 
reserved during the immediately preceding period of two years: 
Provided that at the end of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution all such reservations 
shall cease. 
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall bar the appointment of members of the Anglo-Indian community to posts 
other than, or in addition to, those reserved for the community under that clause if such members are found 
qualified for appointment on merit as compared with the members of other communities. 
1. The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,  s.29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-third Amendment) Act,1969, s.4 for ―nominated such number of members of the community to 
the Assembly as he considers appropriate‖. (w.e.f. 23-1-1970). 
3. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Fourth Amendment) Act, 2019, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25-1-2020). 
4. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Fourth Amendment) Act, 2019, s. 2, for the words ―seventy years‖ (w.e.f.25-1-2020).  
The words ―seventy years‖ were subs. for the words ―sixty years‖ by the Constitution (Ninety-fifth Amendment) Act, 2009, s. 2. 
(w.e.f. 25-1-2010).  The words ―sixty years‖ were subs. for the words ―fifty years‖ by the Constitution (Seventy-ninth 
Amendment) Act, 1999, s. 2. (w.e.f. 25-1-2000). The words ―fifty years‖ were subs. for the words ―forty years‖ by the Constitution 
(Sixty-second Amendment) Act, 1989, s. 2. The words ―forty years‖ were subs. for the original words ―thirty years‖ by the 
Constitution (Forty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1980, s. 2.  
5. Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-second Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 6-9-2000). 
139 
337. Special provision with respect to educational grants for the benefit of Anglo-Indian 
community.—During the first three financial years after the commencement of this Constitution, the same 
grants, if any, shall be made by the Union and by each State1*** for the benefit of the Anglo-Indian 
community in respect of education as were made in the financial year ending on the thirty-first day of 
March, 1948. 
During every succeeding period of three years the grants may be less by ten per cent. than those for the 
immediately preceding period of three years: 
Provided that at the end of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution such grants, to the 
extent to which they are a special concession to the Anglo-Indian community, shall cease: 
Provided further that no educational institution shall be entitled to receive any grant under this article 
unless at least forty per cent. of the annual admissions therein are made available to members of 
communities other than the Anglo-Indian community. 
338. 2[National Commission for Scheduled Castes].—3[4[(1) There shall be a Commission for the 
Scheduled Castes to be known as the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist 
of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of 
office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President 
may by rule determine.] 
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the 
President by warrant under his hand and seal. 
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission— 
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled 
Castes5*** under this Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force or under any order 
of the Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards; 
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the 
Scheduled Castes4***; 
(c) to participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic development of the 
Scheduled Castes 4*** and to evaluate the progress of their development under the Union and any State; 
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, reports 
upon the working of those safeguards; 
(e) to make in such reports recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Union or any 
State for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and 
socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes4***; and 
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and 
advancement of the Scheduled Castes as the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by 
Parliament, by rule specify. 
1. The words and letters ―specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956,  s. 29 and Sch.(w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2, for the marginal heading (w.e.f. 19-2-2004). 
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1990, for cls. (1) and (2), cls. (1) to (9) was substituted (w.e.f. 12-3-1992). 
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2, for cls. (1) and (2) (w.e.f. 19-2-2004). 
5. The words ―and Scheduled Tribes‖ omitted by ibid.  
140 
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a 
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the 
Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations. 
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which any State Government is 
concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid 
before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be 
taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of 
such recommendations. 
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in sub-clause (a) or inquiring into 
any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court  trying a suit and 
in particular in respect of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining 
him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; 
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine. 
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters 
affecting Scheduled Castes1***.] 
2
 [(10)] In this article, references to the Scheduled Castes3*** shall be construed as including references 
3*** to the Anglo-Indian community. 
4
 [338A. National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.—(1) There shall be a Commission for the 
Scheduled Tribes to be known as the National Commission for the Scheduled Tribes. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist 
of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of 
office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President 
may by rule determine.  
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the 
President by warrant under his hand and seal.  
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission— 
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating  to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled 
Tribes under this Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of 
the Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards; 
1. The words ―and Scheduled Tribes‖ omitted by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).  
2. Cl. (3) re-numbered as cl. (10) by the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-3-1992).  
3. The words ―to such other backward classes as the President may, on receipt of the report of a Commission appointed under clause 
(1) of article 340, by order specify and also‖ omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018, s. 2 
(w.e.f. 11-8-2018). 
4.Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19-2-2004). 
141 
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of  the 
Scheduled Tribes; 
(c) to participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic development of the 
Scheduled Tribes and to evaluate the progress of their development under the Union and any State; 
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, 
reports upon the working of those safeguards; 
(e) to make in such reports recommendation as to the  measures that should be taken by the 
Union or any State for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for 
the protection,  welfare and socio-economic development of the Scheduled Tribes; and  
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and 
advancement of the Scheduled Tribes as the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by 
Parliament, by rule specify. 
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a 
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the 
Union and the reasons for the  non-acceptance, if any, of  any such recommendations. 
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which any State Government is 
concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid 
before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be 
taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of 
such recommendations. 
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in sub-clause (a) or inquiring into 
any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and 
in particular in respect of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of  India and examining 
him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; 
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule,  determine. 
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters 
affecting Scheduled Tribes.] 
1
 [338B. National Commission for Backward Classes.— (1) There shall be a Commission for the 
socially and educationally backward classes to be known as the National Commission for Backward Classes. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist 
of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of 
office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President 
may by rule determine. 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11-8-2018). 
142 
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the 
President by warrant under his hand and seal. 
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission— 
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the socially and 
educationally backward classes under this Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force 
or under any order of the Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards; 
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the 
socially and educationally backward classes; 
(c) to participate and advise on the socio-economic development of the socially and educationally 
backward classes and to evaluate the progress of their development under the Union and any State; 
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, 
reports upon the working of those safeguards; 
(e) to make in such reports the recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the 
Union or any State for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the 
protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the socially and educationally backward classes; 
and  
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and 
advancement of the socially and educationally backward classes as the President may, subject to the 
provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.  
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a 
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the 
Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.  
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which any State Government is 
concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the State Government which shall cause it to be laid 
before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be 
taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of 
such recommendations.  
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in sub-clause (a) or inquiring into 
any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and 
in particular in respect of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining 
him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; (f) any other matter which 
the President may, by rule, determine.  
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters 
affecting the socially and educationally backward classes.] 
143 
339. Control of the Union over the administration of Scheduled Areas and the welfare of 
Scheduled Tribes.—(1) The President may at any time and shall, at the expiration of ten years from the 
commencement of this Constitution by order appoint a Commission to report on the administration of the 
Scheduled Areas and the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the States1***. 
The order may define the composition, powers and procedure of the Commission and may contain such 
incidental or ancillary provisions as the President may consider necessary or desirable. 
(2) The executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of directions to 2[a State] as to the 
drawing up and execution of schemes specified in the direction to be essential for the welfare of the 
Scheduled Tribes in the State. 
340. Appointment of a Commission to investigate the conditions of backward classes.—(1) The 
President may by order appoint a Commission consisting of such persons as he thinks fit to investigate the 
conditions of socially and educationally backward classes within the territory of India and the difficulties 
under which they labour and to make recommendations as to the steps that should be taken by the Union or 
any State to remove such difficulties and to improve their condition and as to the grants that  should be made 
for the purpose by the Union or any State and the conditions subject to which such grants should be made, 
and the order appointing such Commission shall define the procedure to be followed by the Commission. 
(2) A Commission so appointed shall investigate the matters referred to them and present to the 
President a report setting out the facts as found by them and making such recommendations as they think 
proper. 
(3) The President shall cause a copy of the report so presented together with a memorandum explaining 
the action taken thereon to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
341. Scheduled Castes.—(1) The President 3[may with respect to any State 4[or Union territory], and 
where it is a State 5***, after consultation with the Governor6*** thereof,] by public notification7, specify 
the castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the purposes of 
this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to that State8[or Union territory, as the case 
may be.] 
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes specified in a 
notification issued under clause (1) any caste, race or tribe or part of or group within any caste, race or tribe, 
but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent 
notification. 
342. Scheduled Tribes.—(1) The  President  9[may  with  respect to any  State  or  Union  territory, and  
1. The words and letters ―specified in Part A and Part B of the First Schedule‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956,  s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Subs. by ibid., for ―any such state‖.  
3. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 10, for ―may, after consultation with the Governor or Rajpramukh of a 
State,‖ (w.e.f. 18-6-1951). 
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
5. The words and letters ―specified in Part A and Part B of the First Schedule‖ omitted by ibid. 
6. The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by ibid.. 
7.  See the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 (C.O. 19), the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 
1951 (C.O. 32), the Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled Castes Order, 1956 (C.O. 52), the Constitution (Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli) (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1962 (C.O. 64), the Constitution (Pondicherry) Scheduled Castes Order, 1964 (C.O. 68), 
the Constitution (Goa, Daman and Diu) Scheduled Castes Order, 1968 (C.O. 81) and the Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes 
Order, 1978 (C.O. 110).  
8. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.(w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
9. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 11, for ―may, after consultation with the Governor or Rajpramukh of a 
State,‖ (w.e.f. 18-6-1951). 
144 
where it is a State 1***, after consultation with the Governor 2*** thereof,] by public notification3, specify 
the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which shall for the 
purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State or Union territory, as 
the case may be. 
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Tribes specified in a 
notification issued under clause (1) any tribe or tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or 
tribal community, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any 
subsequent notification. 
4
 [342A. Socially and educationally backward classes.—(1) The President may with respect to any 
State or Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public 
notification, specify the socially and educationally backward classes which shall for the purposes of this 
Constitution be deemed to be socially and educationally backward classes in relation to that State or Union 
territory, as the case may be.  
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the Central List of socially and educationally 
backward classes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any socially and educationally backward 
class, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent 
notification.]