PART XVII 
OFFICIAL LANGUAGE 
CHAPTER I.—LANGUAGE OF THE UNION 
343. Official language of the Union.—(1) The official language of the Union shall be Hindi in 
Devanagari script. 
The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union shall be the international form of 
Indian numerals. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), for a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this 
Constitution, the English language shall continue to be used for all the official purposes of the Union for 
which it was being used immediately before such commencement: 
Provided that the President may, during the said period, by order5 authorise the use of the Hindi 
language in addition to the English language and of the Devanagari form of numerals in addition to the 
international form of Indian numerals for any of the official purposes of the Union. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, Parliament may by law provide for the use, after the said 
period of fifteen years, of— 
(a) the English language, or 
(b) the Devanagari form of numerals, 
for such purposes as may be specified in the law. 
344. Commission and Committee of Parliament on official language.—(1) The President shall, at the 
expiration of  five  years  from  the  commencement  of  this  Constitution  and  thereafter at the expiration of  
1.The words and letters ―specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956,  s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by s.29 and Sch., ibid. 
3. See the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 (C.O. 22), the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 
1951 (C.O. 33), the Constitution (Andaman and Nicobar Islands) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1959 (C.O. 58), the Constitution (Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli) (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1962 (C.O. 65), the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1967 
(C.O. 78), the Constitution (Goa, Daman and Diu) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1968 (C.O. 82), the Constitution (Nagaland) 
Scheduled Tribes Order, 1970, (C.O 88) and the Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1978 (C.O. 111).  
4. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018, s. 4 (w.e.f. 11-8-2018). 
5. See C.O. 41. 
145 
ten years from such commencement, by order constitute a Commission which shall consist of a Chairman 
and such other members representing the different languages specified in the Eighth Schedule as the 
President may appoint, and the order shall define the procedure to be followed by the Commission. 
(2) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to the President as to— 
(a) the progressive use of the Hindi language for the official purposes of the Union; 
(b) restrictions on the use of the English language for all or any of the official purposes of the Union; 
(c) the language to be used for all or any of the purposes mentioned in article 348; 
(d) the form of numerals to be used for any one or more specified purposes of the Union; 
(e) any other matter referred to the Commission by the President as regards the official language of 
the Union and the language for communication between the Union and a State or between one State and 
another and their use. 
(3) In making their recommendations under clause (2), the Commission shall have due regard to the 
industrial, cultural and scientific advancement of India, and the just claims and the interests of persons 
belonging to the non-Hindi speaking areas in regard to the public services. 
(4) There shall be constituted a Committee consisting of thirty members, of whom twenty shall be 
members of the House of the People and ten shall be members of the Council of States to be elected 
respectively by the members of the House of the People and the members of the Council of States in 
accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote. 
(5) It shall be the duty of the Committee to examine the recommendations of the Commission 
constituted under clause (1) and to report to the President their opinion thereon. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything in article 343, the President may, after consideration of the report referred 
to in clause (5), issue directions in accordance with the whole or any part of that report. 
CHAPTER II.—REGIONAL LANGUAGES 
345. Official language or languages of a State.—Subject to the provisions of articles 346 and 347, the 
Legislature of a State may by law adopt any one or more of the languages in use in the State or Hindi as the 
language or languages to be used for all or any of the official purposes of that State: 
Provided that, until the Legislature of the State otherwise provides by law, the English language shall 
continue to be used for those official purposes within the State for which it was being used immediately 
before the commencement of this Constitution. 
346. Official language for communication between one State and another or between a State and 
the Union.—The language for the time being authorised for use in the Union for official purposes shall be 
the official language for communication between one State and another State and between a State and the 
Union: 
Provided that if two or more States agree that the Hindi language should be the official language for 
communication between such States, that language may be used for such communication. 
347. Special provision relating to language spoken by a section of the population of a State.—On a 
demand being made in that behalf the President may, if he is satisfied that a substantial proportion of the 
population of a State desire the use of any language spoken by them to be recognised by that State, direct 
that such language shall also be officially recognised throughout that State or any part thereof for such 
purpose as he may specify. 
146 
CHAPTER III.—LANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT, 
HIGH COURTS, ETC. 
348. Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts and for Acts, Bills, etc.—
 (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, until Parliament by law otherwise 
provides— 
(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court, 
(b) the authoritative texts— 
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in either House of Parliament 
or in the House or either House of the Legislature of a State, 
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of all Ordinances 
promulgated by the President or the Governor1*** of a State, and 
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under this Constitution or under any law 
made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State, 
shall be in the English language. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of clause (1), the Governor of a State may, with the 
previous consent of the President, authorise the use of the Hindi language, or any other language used for 
any official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court having its principal seat in that State: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any judgment, decree or order passed or made by such 
High Court. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (b) of clause (1), where the Legislature of a State has 
prescribed any language other than the English language for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the 
Legislature of the State or in Ordinances promulgated by the Governor1*** of the State or in any order, rule, 
regulation or bye-law referred to in paragraph (iii) of that sub-clause, a translation of the same in the English 
language published under the authority of the Governor1*** of the State in the Official Gazette of that State 
shall be deemed to be the authoritative text thereof in the English language under this article. 
349. Special procedure for enactment of certain laws relating to language.—During the period of 
fifteen years from the commencement of this Constitution, no Bill or amendment making provision for the 
language to be used for any of the purposes mentioned in clause (1) of article 348 shall be introduced or 
moved in either House of Parliament without the previous sanction of the President, and the President shall 
not give his sanction to the introduction of any such Bill or the moving of any such amendment except after 
he has taken into consideration the recommendations of the Commission constituted under clause (1) of 
article 344 and the report of the Committee constituted under clause (4) of that article. 
CHAPTER IV.—SPECIAL DIRECTIVES 
350. Language to be used in representations for redress of grievances.—Every person shall be 
entitled to submit a representation for the redress of any grievance to any officer or authority of the Union or 
a State in any of the languages used in the Union or in the State, as the case may be. 
2
 [350A. Facilities for instruction in mother-tongue at primary stage.—It shall be the endeavour of 
every State and of every local authority within the State to provide adequate facilities for instruction in the 
mother-tongue at the primary stage of education to children belonging to linguistic minority groups; and the 
President may issue such directions to any State as he considers necessary or proper for securing the 
provision of such facilities. 
350B. Special Officer for linguistic minorities.—(1) There shall be a Special Officer for linguistic 
minorities to be appointed by the President. 
1. The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,  s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
147 
(2) It shall be the duty of the Special Officer to investigate all matters relating to the safeguards provided for 
linguistic minorities under this Constitution and report to the President upon those matters at such intervals as the 
President may direct, and the President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament, 
and sent to the Governments of the States concerned.] 
351. Directive for development of the Hindi language.—It shall be the duty of the Union to promote 
the spread of the Hindi language, to develop it so that it may serve as a medium of expression for all the 
elements of the composite culture of India and to secure its enrichment by assimilating without interfering 
with its genius, the forms, style and expressions used in Hindustani and in the other languages of India 
specified in the Eighth Schedule, and by drawing, wherever necessary or desirable, for its vocabulary, 
primarily on Sanskrit and secondarily on other languages.  
PART XVIII 
EMERGENCY PROVISIONS 
352. Proclamation of Emergency.—(1) If the President is satisfied that a grave emergency exists 
whereby the security of India or of any part of the territory thereof is threatened, whether by war or external 
aggression or 1[armed rebellion], he may, by Proclamation, make a declaration to that effect 2[in respect of 
the whole of India or of such part of the territory thereof as may be specified in the Proclamation]. 
3
 [Explanation.—A Proclamation of Emergency declaring that the security of India or any part of the 
territory thereof is threatened by war or by external aggression or by armed rebellion may be made before 
the actual occurrence of war or of any such aggression or rebellion, if the President is satisfied that there is 
imminent danger thereof.] 
4
 [(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1) may be varied or revoked by a subsequent Proclamation. 
(3) The President shall not issue a Proclamation under clause (1) or a Proclamation varying such 
Proclamation unless the decision of the Union Cabinet (that is to say, the Council consisting of the Prime 
Minister and other Ministers of Cabinet rank appointed under article 75) that such a Proclamation may be 
issued has been communicated to him in writing. 
(4) Every Proclamation issued under this article shall be laid before each House of Parliament and shall, 
except where it is a Proclamation revoking a previous Proclamation, cease to operate at the expiration of one 
month unless before the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses of 
Parliament: 
Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being a Proclamation revoking a previous Proclamation) is 
issued at a time when the House of the People has been dissolved, or the dissolution of the House of the 
People takes place during the period of one month referred to in this clause, and if a resolution approving the 
Proclamation has been passed by the Council of States, but no resolution with respect to such Proclamation  
has been passed by the House of the People before the expiration of that period, the Proclamation  shall 
cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after 
its reconstitution, unless before the expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the 
Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the People. 
(5) A Proclamation  so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to operate on the expiration of a period of 
six months from the date of the passing of the second of the resolutions approving the Proclamation  under 
clause (4): 
Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in force of such a Proclamation  
is  passed  by  both  Houses  of  Parliament  the  Proclamation  shall,  unless  revoked, continue in force for a 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 37, for ―internal disturbances‖ (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 48 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 37 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
4. Subs. by ibid., for cls. (2), (2A) and (3). 
148 
further period of six months from the date on which it would otherwise have ceased to operate under this 
clause: 
Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People takes place during any such period of 
six months and a resolution approving the continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the 
Council of States but no resolution with respect to the continuance in force of such Proclamation has been 
passed by the House of the People during the said period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the 
expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution 
unless before the expiration of the said period  of thirty days, a resolution approving the continuance in force  
of the Proclamation  has been also passed by the House of the People. 
(6) For the purposes of clauses (4) and (5), a resolution may be passed by either House of Parliament 
only by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the 
Members of that House present and voting. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing clauses, the President shall revoke a 
Proclamation issued under clause (1) or a Proclamation varying such Proclamation if the House of the 
People passes a resolution disapproving, or, as the case may be, disapproving the continuance in force of, 
such Proclamation. 
(8) Where a notice in writing signed by not less than one-tenth of the total number of members of the 
House of the People has been given, of their intention to move a resolution for disapproving, or, as the case 
may be, for disapproving the continuance in force of, a Proclamation issued under clause (1) or a 
Proclamation varying such Proclamation,— 
(a) to the Speaker, if the House is in session; or 
(b) to the President, if the House  is not in session, 
a special sitting of the House shall be held within fourteen days from the date on which such notice is 
received by the Speaker, or, as the case may be, by the President, for the purpose  of considering such 
resolution.] 
1
 [2[(9)] The power conferred on the President by this article shall include the power  to issue different  
Proclamations  on different grounds, being war or external aggression or 3[armed rebellion] or imminent 
danger of war or external aggression or 3[armed rebellion], whether or not there is a Proclamation  already 
issued by the President under clause (1) and such Proclamation  is in operation. 
4
 *                            
     *                                  
*                                 
          *                                
      *] 
353. Effect of Proclamation of Emergency.—While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, 
then— 
(a) notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the executive power  of the Union shall extend to 
the giving of directions to any State as to the manner in which the executive power  thereof is to be 
exercised; 
(b) the power of Parliament to make laws with respect to any matter shall include power to make 
laws conferring powers and imposing duties, or authorising the conferring of powers and the imposition 
of duties, upon the Union or officers and authorities of the Union as respects that matter, 
notwithstanding that it is one which is not enumerated in the Union List: 
5
 [Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation only in any part of the territory of 
India,— 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (retrospectively). 
2. Cl. (4) re-numbered as cl. (9) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 37 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
3.Subs. by ibid.,  for ―internal disturbances‖. 
4. Cl. (5) omitted by ibid. 
5. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 49  (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
149 
(i) the executive power of the Union to give  directions under clause (a), and 
(ii) the power of Parliament to make laws under clause (b), 
shall also extend to any State other than  a State in which or in any part of which the Proclamation  of Emergency 
is in operation if and in so far as the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities 
in or in relation to the part  of the territory of India in which the Proclamation  of Emergency is in operation.] 
354. Application of provisions relating to distribution of revenues while a Proclamation of Emergency 
is in operation.—(1) The President  may, while a Proclamation  of Emergency is in operation, by order  direct 
that all or any of the provisions of articles 268 to 279 shall for such period, not extending in any case beyond the 
expiration of the financial year in which such Proclamation  ceases  to operate, as may be specified in the order, 
have effect subject  to such exceptions or modifications as he thinks fit. 
(2) Every order made under clause (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 
355. Duty of the Union to protect States against external aggression and internal disturbance.—It shall 
be the duty of the Union to protect every State against external aggression and internal disturbance and to ensure 
that the Government of every State is carried on in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. 
356. Provisions in case of failure of constitutional machinery in States.—(1) If the President, on receipt of 
a report from the Governor 1*** of a State or otherwise, is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the 
Government of the State cannot be carried  on  in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution, the 
President may by Proclamation— 
(a) assume to himself all or any of the functions of the Government of the State and all or any of the 
powers vested in or exercisable by the Governor 2*** or any body or authority in the State  other than the 
Legislature of the State; 
(b) declare that the powers of the Legislature of the State shall be exercisable by or under the authority of 
Parliament; 
(c) make such incidental and consequential provisions as appear to the President to be necessary or 
desirable for giving effect to the objects of the Proclamation,  including provisions for suspending in whole or 
in part the operation of any provisions of this  Constitution relating to any body or authority in the State: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall authorise the President to assume to himself any of the powers 
vested in or exercisable by a High Court, or to suspend in whole or in part the operation of any provision of this 
Constitution relating to High Courts. 
(2) Any such Proclamation may be revoked or varied by a subsequent Proclamation. 
(3) Every Proclamation under this article shall be laid before each House of Parliament and shall, except 
where it is a Proclamation revoking a previous Proclamation, cease to operate at the expiration of two months 
unless before the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament: 
Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being a Proclamation revoking a previous Proclamation) is issued 
at a time when the House of the People is dissolved or the dissolution of the House  of the People takes place 
during the period of two months referred to in this clause, and if a resolution approving the Proclamation has been 
passed by the Council of States, but no  resolution with respect to such Proclamation has been passed by the 
House of the People before the expiration of that period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration 
of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the 
expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been also passed by the 
House of the People. 
1. The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,  s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. The words ―or Rajpramukh, as the case may be‖ omitted by ibid. 
150 
(4) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to operate on the expiration of a period of 1[six 
months from the date of issue of the Proclamation:] 
Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in force of such a Proclamation is 
passed by both Houses of Parliament, the Proclamation shall, unless revoked, continue in force for a further 
period of 2[six months] from the date on which under this clause it would otherwise have ceased to operate, but no 
such Proclamation shall in any case remain in force for more than three years: 
Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People takes place during any such period of2[six 
months] and a resolution approving the continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the Council 
of States, but no resolution with respect to the continuance  in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the 
House of the People during the said period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days 
from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration of the 
said period of thirty days a resolution approving the continuance in force of the Proclamation  has been also 
passed by the House of the People: 
3
 [Provided also that in the case of the Proclamation issued under clause (1) on the 11th day of May, 1987 with 
respect to the State of Punjab, the reference in the first proviso to this clause to ―three years‖ shall be construed as 
a reference to 4[five years].] 
5
 [(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (4), a resolution with respect to the continuance in force 
of a Proclamation approved under clause (3) for any period beyond the expiration of one year from the date of 
issue of such Proclamation shall not be passed by either House of Parliament unless— 
(a) a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, in the whole of India or, as the case may be, in the 
whole or any part of the State, at the time of the passing of such resolution, and 
(b) the Election Commission certifies that the continuance in force of the Proclamation approved under 
clause (3) during the period specified in such resolution is necessary on account of difficulties in holding 
general elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned: 
6
 [Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to the Proclamation issued under clause (1) on the 11th day 
of May, 1987 with respect to the State of Punjab.] 
357. Exercise of legislative powers under Proclamation issued under article 356.—(1) Where by a 
Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 356, it has been declared that the powers of the Legislature of the 
State shall be exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament, it shall be competent— 
(a) for Parliament to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the State to make laws, and 
to authorise the President to delegate, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose, the power so 
conferred to any other authority to be specified by him in that behalf; 
(b) for Parliament, or for the President or other authority in whom such power to make laws is vested 
under sub-clause (a), to make laws conferring powers and imposing duties, or authorising the conferring of 
powers and the imposition of duties, upon the Union or officers and authorities thereof; 
(c) for the President to authorise when the House of the People is not in session expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of the State pending the sanction of such expenditure by Parliament. 
7
 [(2) Any law made in exercise of the power of the Legislature of the State by Parliament or the President     
or  other  authority  referred  to  in  sub-clause (a)  of  clause (1)  which  Parliament  or the President or such other 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 38, for ―one year from the date of the passing of the second of 
the resolutions approving the Proclamation under clause (3)‖ (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). The words ―one year‖ were subs. for the original 
words ―six months‖ by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 50 (w.e.f.3-1-1977). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 38 for ―one year‖ (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). The words ―one year‖ 
were subs. for the original words ―six months‖ by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 50 (w.e.f.3-1-1977). 
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-4-1990).  
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2 (w.e.f. 4-10-1990) and the Constitution (Sixty-eighth 
Amendment) Act, 1991, s. 2 to read as above (w.e.f. 12-3-1991). 
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 38, for cl. (5) (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).Cl. (5) was ins. by the 
Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 6 (retrospectively). 
6. Omitted by the Constitution (Sixty-third Amendment) Act, 1989, s. 2 (w.e.f. 6-1-1990) and ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-fourth 
Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-4-1990). 
7. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 51, for cl. (2) (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
151 
authority would not, but for the issue of a Proclamation under article 356, have been competent to make 
shall, after the Proclamation has ceased to operate, continue in force until altered or repealed or amended by 
a competent Legislature or other authority.] 
358. Suspension of provisions of article 19 during emergencies.—1[(1)]2[While a Proclamation of 
Emergency declaring that the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war or by 
external aggression is in operation], nothing in article 19 shall restrict the power of the State as defined in 
Part III to make any law or to take any executive action which the State would but for the provisions 
contained in that Part be competent to make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the extent of the 
incompetency, cease to have effect as soon as the Proclamation ceases to operate, except as respects things 
done or omitted to be done before the law so ceases to have effect: 
3
 [Provided that 4[where such Proclamation of Emergency] is in operation only in any part of the territory 
of India, any such law may be made, or any such executive action may be taken, under this article in relation 
to or in any State or Union territory in which or in any part of which the Proclamation of Emergency is not in 
operation, if and in so far as the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities 
in or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.] 
5
 [(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply— 
(a) to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that such law is in relation to the 
Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is made; or 
(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law containing such a recital.] 
359. Suspension  of  the  enforcement  of  the rights conferred by Part III during emergencies.—(1) 
Where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the President may by order declare that the right to 
move any court for the enforcement of such of 6[the rights conferred by Part III (except articles 20 and 21)] 
as may be mentioned in the order and all proceedings pending in any court for the enforcement of the rights 
so mentioned shall remain suspended for the period during which the Proclamation is in force or for such 
shorter period as may be specified in the order. 
7
 [(1A) While an order made under clause (1) mentioning any of  the rights conferred by Part III (except 
articles 20 and 21) is in operation, nothing in that Part conferring those rights shall restrict the power of the 
State as defined in the said Part to make any law or to take any executive action which the State would but 
for the provisions contained in that Part be competent to make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the 
extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect as soon as the order aforesaid ceases to operate, except as 
respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so ceases to have effect:] 
8
 [Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation only in any part of the territory of 
India, any such law may be made, or any such executive action may be taken, under this article in relation to 
or in any State or Union territory in which or in any part of which the Proclamation of Emergency is not in 
operation, if and in so far as the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities 
in or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.] 
9
 [(1B) Nothing in clause (1A) shall apply— 
1. Art. 358 re-numbered as cl. (1) thereof by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
2. Subs. by ibid., for ―while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation‖. 
3. Ins.by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 52  (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 39, for ―where a Proclamation of Emergency‖                               
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
5. Ins. by ibid. 
6. Subs. by ibid., s. 40, for ―the rights conferred by Part III‖ (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
7. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 7 (retrospectively). 
8. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 53  (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
9. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 40 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
152 
(a) to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that such law is in relation to the 
Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is made; or 
(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law containing such a recital.] 
(2) An order made as aforesaid may extend to the whole or any part of the territory of India: 
1
 [Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation only in a part of the territory of 
India, any such order shall not extend to any other part of the territory of India unless the President, being 
satisfied that the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in 
relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, 
considers such extension to be necessary.] 
(3) Every order made under clause (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
2359A. [Application of this Part to the State of Punjab.].–Omitted by the Constitution (Sixty-third 
Amendment) Act, 1989, s. 3 (w.e.f. 6-1-1990). 
360. Provisions as to financial emergency.—(1) If the President is satisfied that a situation has arisen 
whereby the financial stability or credit of India or of any part of the territory thereof is threatened, he may 
by a Proclamation make a declaration to that effect. 
3
 [(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1)— 
(a) may be revoked or varied by a subsequent Proclamation; 
(b) shall be laid before each House of Parliament; 
(c) shall cease to operate at the expiration of two months, unless before the expiration of that period 
it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament: 
Provided that if any such Proclamation is issued at a time when the House of the People has been 
dissolved or the dissolution of the House of the People  takes  place  during  the  period  of  two months 
referred to in sub-clause (c), and if a resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed by the Council 
of States, but no resolution with respect to such Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People 
before the expiration of that period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days 
from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration 
of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been also passed by the House 
of the People.] 
(3) During the period  any such Proclamation as is mentioned in clause (1) is in operation, the executive 
authority of the Union shall extend to the giving of directions to any State to observe such canons of 
financial propriety as may be specified in the directions, and to the giving of such other directions as the 
President may deem necessary and adequate for the purpose. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution— 
(a) any such direction may include— 
(i) a provision requiring the reduction of salaries and allowances of all or any class of persons 
serving in connection with the affairs of a State; 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 53  (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1988, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30-3-1988). It shall cease to operate on the expiry of a 
period of two years from the commencement of this Act, i.e. 30th day of March, 1988. 
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 41, for cl. (2) (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
153 
(ii) a provision requiring all Money Bills or other Bills to which the provisions of article 207 
apply to be reserved for the consideration of the President after they are passed by the Legislature of 
the State; 
(b) it shall be competent for the President during the period any Proclamation issued under this 
article is in operation to issue directions for the reduction of salaries and allowances of all or any class of 
persons serving in connection with the affairs of the Union including the Judges of the Supreme Court 
and the High Courts. 
1
 *                            
   *                                 
*                                    
PART XIX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
*                        
          * 
361. Protection of President and Governors and Rajpramukhs.—(1) The President, or the Governor 
or Rajpramukh of a State, shall not be answerable to any court for the exercise and performance of the 
powers and duties of his office or for any act done or purporting to be done by him in the exercise and 
performance of those powers and duties: 
Provided that the conduct of the President may be brought under review by any court, tribunal or body 
appointed or designated by either House of Parliament for the investigation of a charge under article 61: 
Provided further that nothing in this clause shall be construed as restricting the right of any person to 
bring appropriate proceedings against the Government of India or the Government of a State. 
(2) No criminal proceedings whatsoever shall be instituted or continued against the President, or the 
Governor 2*** of a State, in any court during his term of office. 
(3) No process for the arrest or imprisonment of the President, or the Governor 2***  of a State, shall 
issue from any court during his term of office. 
(4) No civil proceedings in which relief is claimed against the President, or the Governor 2*** of a State, 
shall be instituted during his term of office in any court in respect of any act done or purporting to be done 
by him in his personal capacity, whether before or after he entered upon his office as President, or as 
Governor 2*** of such State, until the expiration of two months next after notice in writing has been 
delivered to the President or the Governor 2***, as the case may be, or left at his office stating the nature of 
the proceedings, the cause of action therefor, the name, description and place of residence of the party by 
whom such proceedings are to be instituted and the relief which he claims. 
3
 [361A. Protection of publication of proceedings of Parliament and State Legislatures.—(1) No 
person shall be liable to any proceedings, civil or criminal, in any court in respect of the publication in a 
newspaper of a substantially true report of any proceedings of either House of Parliament or the Legislative 
Assembly, or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature, of a State, unless the publication is proved 
to have been made with malice: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to the publication of any report of the proceedings of a 
secret sitting of either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly, or, as the case may be, either House 
of the Legislature, of a State. 
1. Cl. (5) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 8 (retrospectively) and omitted by the Constitution 
(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 41 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
2. The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,  s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 42 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
154 
(2) Clause (1) shall apply in relation to reports or matters broadcast by means of wireless telegraphy as 
part of any programme or service provided by means of a broadcasting station as it applies in relation to 
reports or matters published in a newspaper. 
Explanation.—In this article, ―newspaper‖ includes a news agency report containing material for 
publication in a newspaper.] 
1
 [361B. Disqualification for appointment on remunerative political post.—A member of a House 
belonging to any political party who is disqualified for being a member of the House under paragraph 2 of 
the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified to hold any remunerative political post for duration of the 
period commencing from  the date of his disqualification  till the date on which the term of his office as such 
member would expire or till the  date on which he contests an election to a House and is declared  elected, 
whichever is earlier. 
Explanation. — For the purposes of this article,— 
(a) the  expression  ―House‖  has  the meaning assigned to it in clause (a) of paragraph 1 of the  
Tenth Schedule;  
(b) the expression ―remunerative political post‖ means any office— 
(i) under  the Government of India or the Government of a State where the salary or 
remuneration   for  such office is paid out of the public revenue of the Government of India or the 
Government of the State, as the case may be; or   
(ii) under a body, whether incorporated or not, which is wholly or partially owned by the 
Government of India or the Government of State, and the salary or remuneration for such office is 
paid by such body,  
except where such salary or remuneration paid is compensatory in nature.] 
362. [Rights and privileges of Rulers of Indian States.]–Omitted by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth 
Amendment)Act, 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28-12-1971). 
363. Bar to interference by courts in disputes arising out of certain treaties, agreements, etc.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution but subject to the provisions of article 143, neither the 
Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in any dispute arising out of any provision of a 
treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument which was entered into or 
executed before the commencement of this Constitution by any Ruler of an Indian State and to which the 
Government of the Dominion of India or any of its predecessor Governments was a party and which has or 
has been continued in operation after such commencement, or in any dispute in respect of any right accruing 
under or any liability or obligation arising out of any of the provisions of this Constitution relating to any 
such treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument. 
(2) In this article— 
(a) ―Indian State‖ means any territory recognised before the commencement of this Constitution by 
His Majesty or the Government of the Dominion of India as being such a State; and 
(b) ―Ruler‖ includes the Prince, Chief or other person recognised before such commencement by His 
Majesty or the Government of the Dominion of India as the Ruler of any Indian State. 
2
 [363A. Recognition granted to Rulers of Indian States to cease and privy purses to be abolished.—
 Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution or in any law for the time being in force— 
(a) the Prince, Chief or other person who, at any time before the commencement of the Constitution 
(Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, was recognised by the President as the Ruler of an Indian State  
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-1-2004).  
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 28-12-1971). 
155 
or any person who, at any time before such commencement, was recognised by the President as the 
successor of such ruler shall, on and from such commencement, cease to be recognised as such Ruler or 
the successor of such Ruler; 
(b) on and from the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, privy 
purse is abolished and all rights, liabilities and obligations in respect of privy purse are extinguished and 
accordingly the Ruler or, as the case may be, the successor of such Ruler, referred to in clause (a) or any 
other person shall not be paid any sum as privy purse.] 
364. Special provisions as to major ports and aerodromes.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution, the President may by public notification direct that as from such date as may be specified in the 
notification— 
(a) any law made by Parliament or by the Legislature of a State shall not apply to any major port or 
aerodrome or shall apply thereto subject to such exceptions or modifications as may be specified in the 
notification, or 
(b) any existing law shall cease to have effect in any major port or aerodrome except as respects 
things done or omitted to be done before the said date, or shall in its application to such port or 
aerodrome have effect subject to such exceptions or modifications as may be specified in the 
notification. 
(2) In this article— 
(a) ―major port‖ means a port declared to be a major port by or under any law made by Parliament or 
any existing law and includes all areas for the time being included within the limits of such port; 
(b) ―aerodrome‖ means aerodrome as defined for the purposes of the enactments relating to airways, 
aircraft and air navigation. 
365. Effect of failure to comply with, or to give effect to, directions given by the Union.—Where any 
State has failed to comply with, or to give effect to, any directions given in the exercise of the executive power 
of the Union under any of the provisions of this Constitution, it shall be lawful for the President to hold that a 
situation has arisen in which the Government of the State cannot be carried on in accordance with the 
provisions of this Constitution. 
366. Definitions.—In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, the following expressions 
have the meanings hereby respectively assigned to them, that is to say— 
(1) ―agricultural income‖ means agricultural income as defined for the purposes of the enactments 
relating to Indian income-tax; 
(2) ―an Anglo-Indian‖ means a person whose father or any of whose other male progenitors in the 
male line is or was of European descent but who is domiciled within the territory of India and is or was 
born within such territory of parents habitually resident therein and not established there for temporary 
purposes only; 
(3) ―article‖ means an article of this Constitution; 
(4) ―borrow‖ includes the raising of money by the grant of annuities, and ―loan‖ shall be construed 
accordingly; 
1
 *                
        *      
*                 
*   
(5) ―clause‖ means a clause of the article in which the expression occurs; 
* 
1. Cl. (4A) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 54 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and omitted by the 
Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 11  (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 
156 
(6) ―corporation tax‖ means any tax on income, so far as that tax is payable by companies and is a 
tax in the case of which the following conditions are fulfilled:— 
(a) that it is not chargeable in respect of agricultural income; 
(b) that no deduction in respect of the tax paid by companies is, by any enactments which may 
apply to the tax, authorised to be made from dividends payable by the companies to individuals; 
(c) that no provision exists for taking the tax so paid into account in computing for the purposes 
of Indian income-tax the total income of individuals receiving such dividends, or in computing the 
Indian income-tax payable by, or refundable to, such individuals; 
(7) ―corresponding Province‖, ―corresponding Indian State‖ or ―corresponding State‖ means in cases 
of doubt such Province, Indian State or State as may be determined by the President to be the 
corresponding Province, the corresponding Indian State or the corresponding State, as the case may be, 
for the particular purpose in question; 
(8) ―debt‖ includes any liability in respect of any obligation to repay capital sums by way of 
annuities and any liability under any guarantee, and ―debt charges‖ shall be construed accordingly; 
(9) ―estate duty‖ means a duty to be assessed on or by reference to the principal value, ascertained in 
accordance with such rules as may be prescribed by or under laws made by Parliament or the Legislature 
of a State relating to the duty, of all property passing upon death or deemed, under the provisions of the 
said laws, so to pass; 
(10) ―existing law‖ means any law, Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule or regulation passed or made 
before the commencement of this Constitution by any Legislature, authority or person having power to 
make such a law, Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule or regulation; 
(11) ―Federal Court‖ means the Federal Court constituted under the Government of India Act, 1935; 
(12) ―goods‖ includes all materials, commodities, and articles; 
1[(12A) ―goods and services tax‖ means any tax on supply of goods, or services or both except taxes 
on the supply of the alcoholic liquor for human consumption;] 
(13) ―guarantee‖ includes any obligation undertaken before the commencement of this Constitution 
to make payments in the event of the profits of an undertaking falling short of a specified amount; 
(14) ―High Court‖ means any Court which is deemed for the purposes of this Constitution to be a 
High Court for any State and includes— 
(a) any Court in the territory of India constituted or reconstituted under this Constitution as a 
High Court, and 
(b) any other Court in the territory of India which may be declared by Parliament by law to be a 
High Court for all or any of the purposes of this Constitution; 
(15) ―Indian State‖ means any territory which the Government of the Dominion of India recognised 
as such a State; 
(16) ―Part‖ means a Part of this Constitution; 
(17) ―pension‖ means a pension, whether contributory or not, of any kind whatsoever payable to or 
in respect of any person, and includes retired pay so payable; a gratuity so payable and any sum or sums 
so payable by way of the return, with or without interest thereon or any other addition thereto, of 
subscriptions to a provident fund; 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 14(i) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).  
157 
(18) ―Proclamation of Emergency‖ means a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 352; 
(19) ―public notification‖ means a notification in the Gazette of India, or, as the case may be, the 
Official Gazette of a State; 
(20) ―railway‖ does not include— 
(a) a tramway wholly within a municipal area, or 
(b) any other line of communication wholly situate in one State and declared by Parliament by 
law not to be a railway; 
1
 *  
2
 *                  
*   
*      
*   
[(22) ―Ruler‖ means the Prince, Chief or other person who, at any time before the commencement 
of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, was recognised by the President as the Ruler 
of an Indian State or any person who, at any time before such commencement, was recognised by the 
President as the successor of such Ruler;] 
(23) ―Schedule‖ means a Schedule to this Constitution; 
(24) ―Scheduled Castes‖ means such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, 
races or tribes as are deemed under article 341 to be Scheduled Castes for the purposes of this 
Constitution; 
(25) ―Scheduled Tribes‖ means such tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within such 
tribes or tribal communities as are deemed under article 342 to be Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of 
this Constitution; 
(26) ―securities‖ includes stock; 
3
 *  
4
 *  
*  
*  
* 
[(26A) ―Services‖ means anything other than goods; 
(26B) ―State‖ with reference to articles 246A, 268, 269, 269A and article 279A includes a Union 
territory with Legislature;] 
5
 [(26C) ―socially and educationally backward classes‖ means such backward classes as are so 
deemed under article 342A for the purposes of this Constitution;] 
(27) ―sub-clause‖ means a sub-clause of the clause in which the expression occurs; 
(28) ―taxation‖ includes the imposition of any tax or impost, whether general or local or special, and ―tax‖ shall be construed accordingly; 
(29) ―tax on income‖ includes a tax in the nature of an excess profits tax; 
6
 [(29A) ―tax on the sale or purchase of goods‖ includes— 
(a) a tax on the transfer, otherwise than in pursuance of a contract, of property in any goods for 
cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration; 
(b) a tax on the transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or in some other form)  involved 
in the execution of a works contract; 
(c) a tax on the delivery of goods on hire-purchase or any system of payment by instalments; 
(d) a tax on the transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose (whether or not for a 
specified period) for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration; 
(e) a tax on the supply of goods by any unincorporated association or body of persons to a 
member thereof for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration; 
1. Cl. (21) omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4, for cl. (22) (w.e.f. 28-12-1971). 
3. Cl.(26A) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 54 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and omitted by the 
Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 11 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 
4. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 14(ii) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
5. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018, s. 5 (w.e.f. 11-8-2018). 
6. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982, s. 4 (w.e.f. 2-2-1983).    
158 
(f) a tax on the supply, by way of or as part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever, of 
goods, being food or any other article for human consumption or any drink (whether or not 
intoxicating), where such supply or service, is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable 
consideration, 
and such transfer, delivery or supply of any goods shall be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the 
person making the transfer, delivery or supply and a purchase of those goods by the person to whom such 
transfer, delivery or supply is made;] 
1
 [(30) ―Union territory‖ means any Union territory specified in the First Schedule and includes any 
other territory comprised within the territory of India but not specified in that Schedule.] 
367. Interpretation.—(1) Unless the context otherwise requires, the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall, 
subject to any adaptations and modifications that may be made therein under article 372, apply for the 
interpretation of this Constitution as it applies for the interpretation of an Act of the Legislature of the 
Dominion of India. 
(2) Any reference in this Constitution to Acts or laws of, or made by, Parliament, or to Acts or laws of, 
or made by, the Legislature of a State 2***, shall be construed as including a reference to an Ordinance made 
by the President or, to an Ordinance made by a Governor 3***, as the case may be. 
(3) For the purposes of this Constitution ―foreign State‖ means any State other than India: 
Provided that, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the President may by order4 
declare any State not to be a foreign State for such purposes as may be specified in the order.  
PART XX 
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION 
368. 5[Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and procedure therefor.]—6[(1) 
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may in exercise of its constituent power amend by 
way of addition, variation or repeal any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in this article.] 
7
 [(2)] An amendment of this Constitution may be initiated only by the introduction of a Bill for the 
purpose in either House of Parliament, and when the Bill is passed in each House by a majority of the total 
membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House 
present and voting,8[it shall be presented to the President who shall give his assent to the Bill and thereupon] 
the Constitution shall stand amended in accordance with the terms of the Bill: 
Provided that if such amendment seeks to make any change in— 
(a) article 54, article 55, article 73, 9[article 162, article241 or article 279A]or 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for cl. (30) (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2.The words and letters ―specified in Part A or Part B of  the  First Schedule ‖ omitted by ibid. 
3. The words ―or Rajpramukh‖ omitted by ibid. 
4. See the Constitution (Declaration as to Foreign States) Order, 1950 (C.O. 2).  
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3, for ―Procedure for amendment of the Constitution.‖         
(w.e.f. 5-11-1971).  
6. Ins. by ibid. 
7. Art. 368 renumbered as cl. (2) thereof by ibid. 
8. Subs. by ibid., for ―it shall be presented to the President for his assent and upon such assent being given to the Bill,‖. 
9. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 15, for the words and figures ―article 162 or article 
241‖ (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
159 
(b) Chapter IV of Part V, Chapter V of Part VI, or Chapter I of Part XI, or 
(c) any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, or 
(d) the representation of States in Parliament, or 
(e) the provisions of this article, 
the amendment shall also require to be ratified by the Legislatures of not less than one-half of the States1*** 
by resolutions to that effect passed by those Legislatures before the Bill making provision for such 
amendment is presented to the President for assent. 
2
 [(3) Nothing in article 13 shall apply to any amendment made under this article.] 
[(4) No  amendment  of  this  Constitution (including the provisions of Part III) made or purporting to 
have been made under this article whether before or after the commencement of section 55 of the Constitution 
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976] shall be called in question in any court on any ground. 
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that there shall be no limitation whatever on the 
constituent power of Parliament to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal the provisions of this 
Constitution under this article.] 
PART XXI 
3
 [TEMPORARY, TRANSITIONAL AND 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS] 
369. Temporary power to Parliament to make laws with respect to certain matters in the State List 
as if they were matters in the Concurrent List.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, 
Parliament shall, during a period of five years from the commencement of this Constitution, have power to 
make laws with respect to the following matters as if they were enumerated in the Concurrent List, 
namely:— 
(a) trade and commerce within a State in, and the production, supply and distribution of, cotton and 
woollen textiles, raw cotton (including ginned cotton and unginned cotton or kapas), cotton seed, paper 
(including newsprint), food-stuffs (including edible oilseeds and oil), cattle fodder (including oil-cakes 
and other concentrates), coal (including coke and derivatives of coal), iron, steel and mica; 
(b) offences against laws with respect to any of the matters mentioned in clause (a), jurisdiction and 
powers of all courts except the Supreme Court with respect to any of those matters, and fees in respect of 
any of those matters but not including fees taken in any court; 
1. The words and letters ―specified in Part A and B of the First Schedule‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act,1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 5-11-1971). 
Cls. (4) and (5) ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 55 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). This  section has been 
declared invalid by the Supreme Court in  Minerva Mills Ltd. and Others Vs. Union of India and Others AIR 1980 SC1789.  
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 2, ―TEMPORARY AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS‖  
(w.e.f. 1-12-1963). 
160 
but any law made by Parliament, which Parliament would not but for the provisions of this article have been 
competent to make, shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of the said 
period, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the expiration thereof. 
** [1370. Temporary provisions with respect to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. – (1) 
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,— 
(a) the provisions of article 238 shall not apply in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir;  
(b) the power of Parliament to make laws for the said State shall be limited to—  
(i) those matters in the Union List and the Concurrent List which, in consultation with the 
Government of the State, are declared by the President to correspond to matters specified in the 
Instrument of Accession governing the accession of the State to the Dominion of India as the 
matters with respect to which the Dominion Legislature may make laws for that State; and  
(ii) such other matters in the said Lists as, with the concurrence of the Government of the State, 
the President may by order specify. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, the Government of the State means the person for the 
time being recognised by the President as the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir acting on the advice of the 
Council of Ministers for the time being in office under the Maharaja‘s Proclamation dated the fifth day of 
March, 1948; 
(c) the provisions of article 1 and of this article shall apply in relation to that State; 
(d) such of the other provisions of this Constitution shall apply in relation to that State subject to 
such exceptions and modifications as the President may by order specify: 
Provided that no such order which relates to the matters specified in the Instrument of Accession of the 
State referred to in paragraph (i) of sub-clause (b) shall be issued except in consultation with the 
Government of the State:  
Provided further that no such order which relates to matters other than those referred to in the last 
preceding proviso shall be issued except with the concurrence of that Government.  
(2) If the concurrence of the Government of the State referred to in paragraph (ii) of sub-clause (b) of 
clause (1) or in the second proviso to sub-clause (d) of that clause be given before the Constituent Assembly 
for the purpose of framing the Constitution of the State is convened, it shall be placed before such Assembly 
for such decision as it may take thereon. 
**In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (3) of article 370 read with clause (1) of article 370 of the Constitution of India, the 
President, on the  recommendation of Parliament, is pleased to declare that, as from the 6th August, 2019, all clauses of said  article 
370 shall cease to be operative except the following which shall read as under, namely:– ―370. All provisions of this Constitution, as amended from time to time, without any modifications or exceptions, shall 
apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir notwithstanding anything contrary contained in article 152 or article 308 
or any other article of this Constitution or any other provision of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir or any law, 
document, judgement, ordinance, order, by-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having the force of law 
in the territory of India, or any other instrument, treaty or agreement as envisaged under article 363 or otherwise.‖. 
(Ministry of Law and Justice Order No. C.O. 273 dated the 5th August, 2019). 
1.In exercise of the powers conferred by this article the President, on the recommendation of the Constituent Assembly of the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir, declared that, as from the 17th day of November, 1952, the said art. 370 shall be operative with the 
modification that for the Explanation in cl. (1) thereof, the following Explanation is substituted, namely:– ―Explanation.– For the purposes of this article, the Government of the State means the person for the time being recognised 
by the President on the recommendation of the Legislative Assembly of the State as the *Sadar-I Riyasat of Jammu and Kashmir, 
acting on the advice of the Council of Ministers of the State for the time being in office.‖. 
(Ministry of Law Order No. C.O. 44 dated the 15th November, 1952). *Now ―Governor‖. 
161 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this article, the President may, by public 
notification, declare that this article shall cease to be operative or shall be operative only with such 
exceptions and modifications and from such date as he may specify:  
Provided that the recommendation of the Constituent Assembly of the State referred to in clause (2) shall 
be necessary before the President issues such a notification.] 
1
 [371. Special provision with respect to the States of 2*** Maharashtra and Gujarat.—3(1)*** 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may by order made with respect to 4[the 
State of Maharashtra or Gujarat], provide for any special responsibility of the Governor for— 
(a) the establishment of separate development boards for Vidarbha, Marathwada, 5[and the rest of 
Maharashtra or, as the case may be], Saurashtra, Kutch and the rest of Gujarat with the provision that a 
report on the working of  each of these boards will be placed each year before the State Legislative 
Assembly; 
(b) the equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure over the said areas, subject to the 
requirements of the State as a whole; and 
(c) an equitable arrangement providing  adequate facilities for technical education and vocational 
training, and adequate opportunities for employment in services under the control of the State 
Government, in respect of all the said areas, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole.] 
6
 [371A. Special provision with respect to the State of Nagaland.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in 
this Constitution,— 
(a) no Act of Parliament in respect of— 
(i) religious or social practices of the Nagas, 
(ii) Naga customary law and procedure, 
(iii) administration of civil and criminal justice involving decisions according to Naga 
customary law, 
(iv) ownership and transfer of land and its resources, 
shall apply to the State of Nagaland unless the Legislative Assembly of   Nagaland by a resolution so 
decides; 
(b) the Governor of Nagaland shall have special responsibility with respect to law and order in the 
State of Nagaland for so long as in his opinion internal disturbances occurring in the Naga Hills
Tuensang Area immediately before the formation of that State continue therein  or in any part thereof 
and in the discharge of his functions in relation thereto the Governor shall, after consulting the Council 
of Ministers, exercise his individual judgment as to the action to be taken: 
Provided that if any question  arises whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects which the 
Governor is under  this sub-clause required to act in the exercise of his individual judgment, the decision 
of the Governor in  his discretion shall be  final, and the validity of anything done by the Governor shall 
not be called in question on the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in the exercise of his 
individual judgment: 
Provided further that if the President on receipt  of a report from the Governor or otherwise is 
satisfied that it is no longer necessary for the Governor to have special responsibility with respect to    
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 22 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. The words ―Andhra Pradesh‖, omitted by Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-7-1974).  
3. Cl. (1) omitted by ibid. 
4. Subs. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 85, for ―the State of Bombay‖ (w.e.f. 1-5-1960). 
5. Subs. by ibid, for ―the rest of Maharashtra‖ (w.e.f. 1-5-1960). 
6.Ins. by the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-12-1963). 
162 
law and order in the State of Nagaland, he may by order direct that the Governor shall cease to have such 
responsibility with effect from such date as may be specified in the order; 
(c) in making his recommendation with respect to any demand for a grant, the Governor of Nagaland 
shall ensure that any money provided by the Government of India out of the Consolidated Fund of  India 
for any specific service or purpose is included in the demand for a grant relating to that service or 
purpose and not in any other demand; 
(d) as from such date as the Governor of Nagaland may by public notification in this behalf specify, 
there shall be established a regional council for the Tuensang district consisting  of thirty-five members 
and the Governor shall in his discretion make rules providing for— 
(i) the composition of the regional council and the manner in which the members of the regional 
council shall be chosen: 
Provided  that the Deputy Commissioner of the Tuensang district  shall be the Chairman ex 
officio of the regional council and the Vice-Chairman of the regional council shall be elected by the 
members thereof from amongst themselves; 
(ii) the qualifications  for  being chosen as, and for being, members of the regional council; 
(iii) the term of office of, and the salaries and allowances, if any, to be paid to members of, the 
regional council; 
(iv) the procedure and conduct of business of the regional council; 
(v) the appointment  of officers and staff of the regional council and their conditions of services; 
and 
(vi) any other matter in respect of which it is necessary to make rules for the constitution and 
proper functioning of the regional council. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, for a period of ten years from the date of the 
formation of the State of Nagaland or for such further period as the Governor may, on the recommendation 
of the regional council, by public notification specify in this behalf,— 
(a) the administration of the Tuensang district shall be carried on by the Governor; 
(b) where any money is provided by the Government of India to the Government of Nagaland to 
meet the requirements of the State of Nagaland as a whole, the Governor shall in his discretion arrange 
for an equitable allocation of that money between the Tuensang district and the rest of the State; 
(c) no Act of the Legislature of Nagaland shall apply to Tuensang district unless the Governor, on 
the recommendation of the regional council, by public notification so directs and the Governor in giving 
such direction with respect to any such Act may direct that the Act shall in its application to the 
Tuensang district or any part thereof have effect subject to such exceptions or modifications as the 
Governor may specify on the recommendation of the regional council: 
163 
Provided that any direction given under this sub-clause may be given so as to have retrospective 
effect; 
(d) the Governor may make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of the Tuensang 
district and any regulations so made may repeal or amend with retrospective effect, if necessary, any Act of 
Parliament or any other law which is for the time being applicable to that district; 
(e) (i) one of the members representing the Tuensang district in the Legislative Assembly of 
Nagaland shall be appointed Minister for Tuensang affairs by the Governor on the advice of the Chief 
Minister and the Chief Minister in tendering his advice shall act on the recommendation of the majority 
of the members as aforesaid1; 
(ii) the Minister for Tuensang affairs shall deal with, and have direct access to the Governor on, all 
matters relating to the Tuensang district but he shall keep the Chief Minister informed about the same; 
(f) notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this clause, the final decision on all 
matters relating to the Tuensang district shall be made by the Governor in his discretion; 
(g) in articles 54 and 55 and clause (4) of article 80, references to the elected members of the 
Legislative Assembly of a State or to each such member shall include references to the members or 
member of the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland elected by the regional council established under this 
article; 
(h) in article 170— 
(i) clause (1) shall, in relation to the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland, have effect as if for the 
word ―sixty‖, the word ―forty-six‖ had been substituted; 
(ii) in the said clause, the reference to direct election from territorial constituencies in the State 
shall include election by the members of the regional council established under this article; 
(iii) in clauses (2) and (3), references to territorial constituencies shall mean references to 
territorial constituencies in the Kohima and Mokokchung districts. 
(3) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the foregoing provisions of this article, the President 
may by order do anything (including any adaptation or modification of any other article) which appears to 
him to be necessary for the purpose of removing that difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of three years from the date of the 
formation of the State of Nagaland. 
Explanation.—In this article, the Kohima, Mokokchung and Tuensang districts shall have the same 
meanings as in the State of Nagaland Act, 1962.] 
2
 [371B. Special provision with respect to the State of Assam.—Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution, the President may, by order made with respect to the State of Assam, provide for the 
constitution and functions of a committee of the Legislative Assembly of the State consisting of members   
of that Assembly elected from the tribal areas specified in 3[Part I] of the table appended to paragraph 20    
1. Paragraph 2 of the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. X provides (w.e.f. 1-12-1963) that article 371A of the 
Constitution of India shall have effect as if the following proviso were added to paragraph (i) of sub-clause (e) of clause (2) 
thereof, namely:- ―Provided that the Governor may, on the advice of the Chief Minister, appoint any person as Minister for Tuensang affairs to act 
as such until such time as persons are chosen in accordance with law to fill the seats allocated to the Tuensang district, in the 
Legislative Assembly of Nagaland.‖ 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25-9-1969). 
3. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 7, for ―Part A‖ (w.e.f. 21-1-1972). 
164 
of the Sixth Schedule and such number of other members of that Assembly as may be specified in the order 
and for the modifications to be made in the rules of procedure of that Assembly for the constitution and 
proper functioning of such committee.] 
1
 [371C. Special provision with respect to the State of Manipur.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution, the President may, by order made with respect to the State of Manipur, provide for the 
constitution and functions of a committee  of the Legislative Assembly of the State  consisting of members of 
that Assembly elected from the Hill Areas of that State, for the modifications to be made in the rules of 
business of the Government and in the rules of procedure of the Legislative Assembly of the State and for any 
special responsibility of the Governor in order to secure the proper functioning of such committee. 
(2) The Governor shall annually, or whenever so required by the President, make a report to the President 
regarding the administration of the Hill Areas in the State of Manipur and the executive power of the Union 
shall extend to the giving of directions to the State as to the administration of the said areas. 
Explanation.—In this article, the expression ―Hill Areas‖ means such areas as the President may, by 
order, declare to be Hill areas.] 
2
 [371D. Special provisions with respect to 3 [the State of Andhra Pradesh or the State of 
Telangana].—4[(1) The President may by order made with respect  to the State of Andhra Pradesh or the State 
of  Telangana, provide, having regard to the requirement of each State, for equitable opportunities and facilities 
for the people belonging to different parts of such State, in the matter of public employment and in the matter 
of education, and different provisions may be made for various parts of the States.] 
(2) An order made under clause (1) may, in particular,— 
(a) require the State Government to organise any class or classes of posts in a civil service of, or any 
class or classes of civil posts under, the State  into different local cadres for different parts of the State 
and allot in accordance with such principles and procedure as may be specified in the order the persons 
holding such posts to the local cadres so organised; 
(b) specify any part or parts of the State which shall be regarded as the local area— 
(i) for direct recruitment to posts in any local cadre (whether organised in pursuance of an order 
under this article or constituted otherwise) under the State Government; 
(ii) for direct recruitment to posts in any cadre under any local authority within the State; and  
(iii) for the purposes of admission to any University within the State or to any other educational 
institution which is subject to the control of the State Government; 
(c) specify the extent to which, the manner in which and the conditions subject to which, preference 
or reservation shall be given or made— 
(i) in the matter of direct recruitment to posts in any such cadre referred to in sub-clause (b) as 
may be  specified in this behalf in the order; 
(ii) in the matter of admission to any such University or other educational institution referred to 
in sub-clause (b) as may be specified in this behalf in the order, 
1.Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 5 (w.e.f. 15-2-1972). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-7-1974). 
3. Subs. by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, s. 97, for ―the State of Andhra Pradesh‖ (w.e.f.2-6-2014). 
4. Subs. by ibid. 
165 
to or in favour of candidates who have resided or studied for any period specified in the order in the local 
area in respect of such cadre, University or other educational institution, as the case may be. 
(3) The President may, by order, provide for the constitution of an Administrative Tribunal for 1[the 
State of Andhra Pradesh and for the State of Telangana] to exercise such jurisdiction, powers and authority 
[including any jurisdiction, power and authority which immediately before the commencement of the 
Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, was exercisable by any court (other than the Supreme 
Court) or by any tribunal or other authority] as may be specified in the order with respect to the following 
matters, namely:— 
(a) appointment, allotment or promotion to such class or classes of posts in any civil service of the 
State, or to such class or classes of civil posts under the State, or to such class or classes of posts under 
the control of any local authority within the State, as may be specified in the order; 
(b) seniority of persons appointed, allotted or promoted to such class or classes of posts in any civil 
service of the State, or to such class or classes of civil posts under the State, or to such class or classes of 
posts under the control of any local authority within the State, as may be specified in the order; 
(c) such other conditions of service of persons appointed, allotted or promoted to such class or 
classes of posts in any civil service of the State or to such class or classes of civil posts under the State or 
to such class or classes of posts under the control of any local authority within the State, as may be 
specified in the order. 
(4) An order made under clause (3) may— 
(a) authorise the Administrative Tribunal to receive representations for the redress of grievances 
relating to any matter within its jurisdiction as the President may specify in the order and to make such 
orders thereon as the Administrative Tribunal deems fit; 
(b) contain such provisions with respect to the powers and authorities and procedure of the 
Administrative Tribunal (including provisions with respect to the powers of the Administrative Tribunal 
to punish for contempt of itself) as the President may deem necessary; 
(c) provide for the transfer to the Administrative Tribunal of such classes of proceedings, being 
proceedings relating to matters within its jurisdiction and pending before any court (other than the 
Supreme Court) or tribunal or other authority immediately before the commencement of such order, as 
may be specified in the order; 
(d) contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions (including provisions as to 
fees and as to limitation, evidence or for the application of any law for the time being in force subject to 
any exceptions or modifications) as the President may deem necessary. 

 (5) The Order of the Administrative Tribunal finally disposing of any case shall become effective upon 
its confirmation by the State Government or on the expiry of three months from the date on which the order 
is made, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that the State Government may, by special order made in writing and for reasons to be 
specified therein, modify or annul any order of the Administrative Tribunal before it becomes effective and 
in such a case, the order of the Administrative Tribunal shall have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be. 
(6) Every special order made by the State Government under the proviso to clause (5) shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before both Houses of the State Legislature. 
1. Subs. by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, s. 97, for ―the State of Andhra Pradesh‖ (w.e.f.2-6-2014). 
 In P. Sambamurthy and  Others Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh and Others, AIR 1987 SC 663,  the Supreme Court declared cl. (5) of 
art. 371D along with the proviso to be unconstitutional and void.  
166 
(7) The High Court for the State shall not have any powers of superintendence over the Administrative 
Tribunal and no court (other than the Supreme Court) or tribunal shall exercise any jurisdiction, power or 
authority in respect of any matter subject to the jurisdiction, power or authority of, or in relation to, the 
Administrative Tribunal. 
(8) If the President is satisfied that the continued existence of the Administrative Tribunal is not 
necessary, the President may by order abolish the Administrative Tribunal and make such provisions in such 
order as he may deem fit for the transfer and disposal of cases pending before the Tribunal immediately 
before such abolition. 
(9) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority,— 
(a) no appointment, posting, promotion or transfer of any person— 
(i) made before the 1st day of November, 1956, to any post under the Government of, or any 
local authority within, the State of Hyderabad as it existed before that date; or 
(ii) made before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, 
to any post under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, the State of Andhra 
Pradesh; and 
(b) no action taken or thing done by or before any person referred to in sub-clause (a), 
shall be deemed to be illegal or void or ever to have become illegal or void merely on the ground that the 
appointment, posting, promotion or transfer of such person was not made in accordance with any law, then 
in force, providing for any requirement as to residence within the State of Hyderabad or, as the case may be, 
within any part of the State of Andhra Pradesh, in respect of such appointment, posting, promotion or 
transfer. 
(10) The provisions of this article and of any order made by the President thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything in any other provision of this Constitution or in any other law for the time being in 
force. 
371E. Establishment of Central University in Andhra Pradesh.—Parliament may by law provide for 
the establishment of a University in the State of Andhra Pradesh.] 
1
 [371F. Special provisions with respect to the State of Sikkim.—Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution,— 
(a) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim shall consist of not less than thirty members; 
(b) as from the date of commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975 
(hereafter in this article referred to as the appointed day)— 
(i) the Assembly for Sikkim formed as a result of the elections held in Sikkim in April, 1974 
with thirty-two members elected in the said elections (hereinafter referred to as the sitting members) 
shall be deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim duly constituted under this 
Constitution; 
(ii) the sitting members shall be deemed to be the members of the Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Sikkim duly elected under this Constitution; and 
(iii) the said Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim shall exercise the powers and perform 
the functions of the Legislative Assembly of a State under this Constitution; 
(c) in the case of the Assembly deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim under 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 3 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).  
167 
clause (b), the references to the period of 1[five years], in clause (1) of article 172 shall be construed as 
references to a period of 2[four years] and the said period of 3[four years] shall be deemed to commence 
from the appointed day; 
(d) until other provisions are made by Parliament by law, there shall be allotted to the State of 
Sikkim one seat in the House of the People and the State of Sikkim shall form one parliamentary 
constituency to be called the parliamentary constituency for Sikkim; 
(e) the representative of the State of Sikkim in the House of the People in existence on the appointed 
day shall be elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim; 
(f) Parliament may, for the purpose of protecting the rights and interests of the different sections of 
the population of Sikkim make provision for the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Sikkim which may be filled by candidates belonging to such sections and for the delimitation of 
the assembly constituencies from which candidates belonging to such sections alone may stand for 
election to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim; 
(g) the Governor of Sikkim shall have special responsibility for peace and for an equitable 
arrangement for ensuring the social and economic advancement of different sections of the population of 
Sikkim and in the discharge of his special responsibility under this clause, the Governor of Sikkim shall, 
subject to such directions as the President may, from time to time, deem fit to issue, act in his discretion; 
(h) all property and assets (whether within or outside the territories comprised in the State of Sikkim) 
which immediately before the appointed day were vested in the Government of Sikkim or in any other 
authority or in any person for the purposes of the Government of Sikkim shall, as from the appointed day, 
vest in the Government of the State of Sikkim; 
(i) the High Court functioning as such immediately before the appointed day in the territories 
comprised in the State of Sikkim shall, on and from the appointed day, be deemed to be the High Court 
for the State of Sikkim; 
(j) all courts of civil, criminal and revenue jurisdiction, all authorities and all officers, judicial, executive 
and ministerial, throughout the territory of the State of Sikkim shall continue on and from the appointed day 
to exercise their respective functions subject to the provisions of this Constitution; 
(k) all laws in force immediately before the appointed day in the territories comprised in the State of 
Sikkim or any part thereof shall continue to be in force therein until amended or repealed by a competent 
Legislature or other competent authority; 
(l) for the purpose of facilitating the application of any such law as is referred to in clause (k) in 
relation to the administration of the State of Sikkim and for the purpose of bringing the provisions of any 
such law into accord with the provisions of this Constitution, the President may, within two years from 
the appointed day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of 
repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon, every such law shall have effect 
subject to the adaptations and modifications so made, and any such adaptation or modification shall not 
be questioned in any court of law; 
(m) neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any dispute or 
other matter arising out of any treaty, agreement, engagement or other similar instrument relating to 
Sikkim which was entered into or executed before the appointed day and to which the Government of 
India or any of its predecessor Governments was a party, but nothing in this clause shall be construed to 
derogate from the provisions of article 143; 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 43, for ―six years‖ (w.e.f. 6-9-1979).The words ―six years‖ 
were subs. for the original words ―five years‖ by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 56 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).  
2.Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 43, for ―five years‖ (w.e.f. 6-9-1979).The words ―five years‖ 
were subs. for the original words ―four years‖ by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 by ibid.  
168 
(n) the President may, by public notification, extend with such restrictions or modifications as he thinks 
fit to the State of Sikkim any enactment which is in force in a State in India at the date of the notification; 
(o) if any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the foregoing provisions of this article, the 
President may, by order1, do anything (including any adaptation or modification of any other article) 
which appears to him to be necessary for the purpose of removing that difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the appointed day; 
(p) all things done and all actions taken in or in relation to the State of Sikkim or the territories 
comprised therein during the period commencing on the appointed day and ending immediately before 
the date on which the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, receives the assent of the 
President shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the provisions of this Constitution as amended by 
the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, be deemed for all purposes to have been validly 
done or taken under this Constitution as so amended.] 
2
 [371G. Special provision with respect to the State of Mizoram.—Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution,— 
(a) no Act of Parliament in respect of— 
(i) religious or social practices of the Mizos, 
(ii) Mizo customary law and procedure, 
(iii) administration of civil and criminal justice involving decisions according to Mizo 
customary law, 
(iv) ownership and transfer of land, 
shall apply to the State of Mizoram unless the Legislative Assembly of the State of Mizoram by a resolution 
so decides: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any Central Act in force in the Union territory of 
Mizoram immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Fifty-third Amendment) Act, 1986; 
(b) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Mizoram shall consist of not less than forty members.] 
3
 [371H. Special provision with respect to the State of Arunachal Pradesh.—Notwithstanding 
anything in this Constitution,— 
(a) the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh shall have special responsibility with respect to law and 
order in the State of Arunachal Pradesh and in the discharge of his functions in relation thereto, the 
Governor shall, after consulting the Council of Ministers, exercise his individual judgment as to the 
action to be taken: 
Provided that if any question arises whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects which the 
Governor is under this clause required to act in the exercise of his individual judgment, the decision of the 
Governor in his discretion shall be final, and the validity of anything done by the Governor shall not be 
called in question on the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in the exercise of his individual 
judgment: 
Provided further that if the President on receipt of a report from the Governor or otherwise is 
satisfied that it is no longer necessary for the Governor to have special responsibility with respect to law 
and order in the State of Arunachal Pradesh, he may by order direct that the Governor shall cease to have 
such responsibility with effect from such date as may be specified in the order; 
1. See the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. XI (C.O. 99). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-third Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).  
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 2  (w.e.f. 20-2-1987). 
169 
(b) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh shall consist of not less than thirty 
members.] 
1
 [371-I. Special provision with respect to the State of Goa.—Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution, the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa shall consist of not less than thirty members.] 
2
 [371J. Special provisions with respect to the State of Karnataka.— (1) The President may, by order 
made with respect to the State of Karnataka, provide for any special responsibility of the Governor for— 
(a) establishment of a separate development board for Hyderabad-Karnataka region with the 
provision that a report on the working of the board will be placed each year before the State Legislative 
Assembly;  
(b) equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure over the said region, subject  to the 
requirements of the State as a whole; and  
(c) equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging to the said region, in matters of 
public employment, education and vocational training, subject to the requirements of the State as a 
whole. 
(2) An order made under sub- clause (c) of clause (1) may provide for— 
(a) reservation of a proportion of  seats educational and vocational training institutions in the 
Hyderabad-Karnataka region for students who belong to that region by birth or by domicile; and  
(b) identification of posts or classes of posts under the State Government and in any body or 
organisation under the control of the State Government in the Hyderabad-Karnataka region and 
reservation of a proportion of such posts for persons who belong to that region by birth or by domicile 
and for appointment thereto by direct recruitment or by promotion or in any other manner as may be 
specified in the order.] 
372. Continuance in force of existing laws and their adaptation.—(1) Notwithstanding the repeal by 
this Constitution of the enactments referred to in article 395 but subject to the other provisions of this 
Constitution, all the law in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution shall continue in force therein until altered or repealed or amended by a competent Legislature 
or other competent authority. 
(2) For the purpose of bringing the provisions of any law in force in the territory of India into accord 
with the provisions of this Constitution, the President may by order 3 make such adaptations and 
modifications of such law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and 
provide that the law shall, as from such date as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to the 
adaptations and modifications so made, and any such adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in 
any court of law. 
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall be deemed— 
(a) to empower the President to make any adaptation or modification of any law after the expiration 
of 4[three years] from the commencement of this Constitution; or 
(b) to prevent any competent Legislature or other competent authority from repealing or amending 
any law adapted or modified by the President under the said clause. 
Explanation I.—The expression ―law in force‖ in this article shall include a law passed or made by  
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1987, s. 2  (w.e.f. 30-5-1987). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-eighth Amendment) Act, 2012, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-10-2013). 
3. See the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 dated the 26th January, 1950, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, p. 449, as amended by 
notification No. S.R.O. 115, dated the 5th June, 1950, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 51, notification No. 
S.R.O. 870, dated the 4th November, 1950, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 903, notification No. S.R.O. 508, 
dated 4th April, 1951, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 287, notification No. S.R.O. 1140B, dated the 2nd July, 
1952, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 616/1, and the Adaptation of the Travancore-Cochin Land Acquisition 
Laws Order, 1952, dated the 20th November, 1952, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 923. 
4. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 12, for ―two years‖ (w.e.f. 18-6-1951). 
170 
a Legislature or other competent authority in the territory of India before the commencement of this 
Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding that it or parts of it may not be then in 
operation either at all or in particular areas. 
Explanation II.—Any law passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority in the 
territory of India which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution had extra-territorial 
effect as well as effect in the territory of India shall, subject to any such adaptations and modifications as 
aforesaid, continue to have such extra-territorial effect. 
Explanation III.—Nothing in this article shall be construed as continuing any temporary law in force 
beyond the date fixed for its expiration or the date on which it would have expired if this Constitution 
had  not come into force. 
Explanation IV.—An Ordinance promulgated by the Governor of a Province under section 88 of the 
Government of India Act, 1935, and in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution 
shall, unless withdrawn by the Governor of the corresponding State earlier, cease to operate at the 
expiration of six weeks from the first meeting after such commencement of the Legislative Assembly of 
that State functioning under clause (1) of article 382, and  nothing in this article shall be construed as 
continuing any such Ordinance in force beyond the said period. 
1
 [372A.  Power of the President to adapt laws.—(1) For the purposes of bringing the provisions of any 
law in force in India or in any part thereof, immediately before the commencement of the Constitution 
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, into accord with the provisions of this Constitution as amended by that 
Act, the President may by order2 made before the first day of November, 1957, make such adaptations and 
modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and 
provide that the law shall, as from such date as may be  specified in the order, have effect subject to the 
adaptations and modifications so made, and any such adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in 
any court of law. 
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall be deemed to prevent a competent Legislature or other competent 
authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by the President under the said clause.] 
373. Power of President to make order in respect of persons under preventive detention in certain 
cases.—Until provision is made by Parliament under clause (7) of article 22, or until the expiration of one 
year from the commencement of this Constitution, whichever  is earlier, the said  article shall have effect as 
if for any reference to Parliament in clauses (4) and (7) thereof there were substituted a reference to the 
President and for any reference to any law made by Parliament in those clauses there were substituted a 
reference to an order made by the President. 
374. Provisions as to Judges of the Federal Court and proceedings pending in the Federal Court or 
before His Majesty in Council.—(1) The Judges of the Federal Court holding office immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise, become on such 
commencement the Judges of the Supreme Court and shall thereupon be entitled to such salaries and 
allowances and to such rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as are provided for under article 125 
in respect of the Judges of the Supreme Court. 
(2) All suits, appeals and proceedings, civil or criminal, pending in the Federal Court at the commencement 
of this Constitution shall stand removed to the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction to 
hear and determine the same, and the judgments and  orders of the Federal Court delivered or made before the  
commencement of this Constitution shall have the same force and effect as if they had been delivered or made 
by the Supreme Court. 
(3) Nothing in this Constitution shall operate to invalidate the exercise of jurisdiction by His Majesty in 
Council to dispose of appeals and petitions from, or in respect of, any judgment, decree or order of any court 
within the territory of India in so far as the exercise of such jurisdiction is authorised by law, and any     
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. See the Adaptation of Laws Order of 1956 and 1957. 
171 
order of His Majesty in Council made on any such appeal or petition after the commencement of this 
Constitution shall for all purposes have effect as if it were an order or decree made by the Supreme Court in 
the exercise of the  jurisdiction conferred on such Court by this Constitution. 
(4) On and from the commencement of this Constitution the jurisdiction of the authority functioning as the 
Privy Council in a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule to entertain and dispose of appeals and 
petitions from or in respect of any judgment, decree or order of any court within that State shall cease, and all 
appeals and other proceedings pending before the said authority at such commencement shall be transferred to, 
and disposed of by, the Supreme Court. 
(5) Further provision may be made by Parliament by law to give effect to the provisions of this article. 
375. Courts, authorities and officers to continue to function subject to the provisions of the 
Constitution.—All courts of civil, criminal and revenue jurisdiction, all authorities and all officers, judicial, 
executive and ministerial, throughout the territory of India, shall continue to exercise their respective 
functions subject to the provisions of this Constitution. 
376. Provisions as to Judges of High Courts.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in clause (2) of article 
217, the Judges of a High Court in any Province holding office immediately before the commencement of 
this Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise, become on such commencement the Judges of the 
High Court in the corresponding State, and shall thereupon be entitled to such salaries and allowances and to 
such rights in  respect of leave of absence and pension as are provided for under article 221 in respect of the 
Judges of such High Court. 1[Any such Judge shall, notwithstanding that he is not a citizen of India, be 
eligible for appointment as Chief Justice of such High Court, or as Chief Justice or other Judge of any other 
High Court.] 
(2) The Judges of a High Court in any Indian State corresponding to any State specified in Part B of the 
First Schedule holding office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they 
have elected otherwise, become on such commencement the Judges of the High Court in the State so specified 
and shall, notwithstanding anything in clauses  (1) and (2) of article 217 but subject to the proviso to clause (1) 
of that article, continue to hold office until the expiration of such period as the President may by order 
determine. 
(3)  In this article, the expression ―Judge‖ does not include an acting Judge or an additional Judge. 
377. Provisions as to Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.—The Auditor-General of India holding 
office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless  he has elected otherwise, become 
on such commencement the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and shall thereupon be entitled to such 
salaries and to such rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as are provided for under clause (3) of article 
148 in respect of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and be entitled to continue to hold office until the 
expiration of his term of office as determined under the provisions which were applicable to him immediately 
before such commencement. 
378. Provisions as to Public Service Commissions.—(1) The members of the Public Service Commission 
for the Dominion of India holding office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, 
unless they have elected otherwise, become on such commencement the members of the Public Service 
Commission for the Union and shall, notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) and (2) of article 316 but subject 
to the proviso to clause (2) of that article, continue to hold office until the expiration of their term of office as 
determined under the rules which were applicable immediately before such commencement to such members. 
(2) The Members of a Public Service Commission of a Province or of a Public Service Commission serving 
the needs of a group of Provinces holding office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, 
unless they have elected otherwise, become on such commencement the members of the Public Service 
Commission for the corresponding  State or the  members of  the  Joint  State Public Service Commission  serving  
1. Added by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 13 (w.e.f. 18-6-1951). 
172 
the needs of the corresponding States, as the case may be, and shall, notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) and 
(2) of article 316 but subject to the proviso to clause (2) of that article, continue to hold office until the expiration 
of their term of office as determined under the rules which  were applicable immediately before such 
commencement to such members. 
1
 [378A. Special provision as to duration of Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly.—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in article 172, the Legislative Assembly of the State of Andhra Pradesh as constituted under 
the provisions of sections 28 and 29 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, shall, unless sooner dissolved, 
continue for a period of five years from the date referred to in the said section 29 and no longer and the 
expiration of the said period shall operate as a dissolution of that Legislative Assembly.] 
[379.—391.]–Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.                
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
392. Power of the President to remove difficulties.—(1) The President may, for the purpose of 
removing any difficulties, particularly in relation to the transition from the provisions of the Government of 
India Act, 1935, to the provisions of this Constitution, by order direct that this Constitution shall, during 
such period as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to such adaptations, whether by way of 
modification, addition or omission, as he may deem to be necessary or expedient: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the first meeting of Parliament duly constituted under 
Chapter II of Part V. 
(2) Every order made under clause (1) shall be laid before Parliament. 
(3) The powers conferred on the President by this article, by article 324, by clause (3) of article 367 and by 
article 391 shall, before the commencement of this Constitution, be exercisable by the Governor-General of the 
Dominion of India. 
PART XXII 
SHORT TITLE, COMMENCEMENT,  2[AUTHORITATIVE 
TEXT IN HINDI] AND REPEALS 
393. Short title.—This Constitution may be called the Constitution of India. 
394.  Commencement.—This article and articles 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 60,  324, 366, 367, 379, 380, 388, 391, 
392 and 393 shall come into force at once, and the remaining provisions of this Constitution shall come into 
force on the twenty-sixth day of January, 1950, which day is referred to in this Constitution as the 
commencement of this Constitution. 
3
 [394A. Authoritative text in the Hindi language.—(1) The President shall cause to be published 
under his authority,— 
(a) the translation of this Constitution in the Hindi language, signed by the members of the 
Constituent Assembly, with such modifications as may be necessary to bring it in conformity with the 
language, style and terminology adopted in the authoritative texts of Central Acts in the Hindi language, 
and incorporating therein all the amendments of this Constitution made before such publication; and 
(b) the translation in the Hindi language of every amendment of this Constitution made in the 
English language. 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9-12-1987). 
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. 
173 
(2) The translation of this Constitution and of every amendment thereof published under clause (1) shall 
be construed to have the same meaning as  the original thereof and if any difficulty arises in so construing 
any part of such translation, the President shall cause the same to be revised suitably. 
(3) The translation of this Constitution and of every amendment thereof published under this article shall 
be deemed to be, for all purposes, the authoritative text thereof in the Hindi language.] 
395. Repeals.—The Indian Independence Act, 1947, and the Government of India Act, 1935, together with 
all enactments amending or supplementing the latter Act, but not including the Abolition of Privy Council 
Jurisdiction Act, 1949, are hereby repealed.  
174