(3) All regulations made under clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph  shall be submitted 
forthwith to the President and, until assented to by him, shall have no effect. 
1
 [20. Tribal areas.—(1) The areas specified in Parts I, II2[, IIA] and III of the table below shall 
respectively be the tribal areas within the State of Assam, the State of Meghalaya2[, the State of Tripura] 
and the 3[State] of Mizoram. 
(2) 4[Any reference in Part I, Part II or Part III of the table below] to any district shall be construed as 
a reference to the territories comprised within the autonomous district of that name existing immediately 
before the day appointed under clause (b) of section 2 of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 
1971: 
Provided that for the purposes of clauses (e) and (f) of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3, paragraph 4, 
paragraph 5, paragraph 6, sub-paragraph (2), clauses (a), (b) and (d) of sub-paragraph (3) and sub
paragraph (4) of paragraph 8 and clause (d) of sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 10 of this Schedule, no part 
of the area comprised within the municipality of Shillong shall be deemed to be within the 5[Khasi Hills 
District]. 
6
 [(3) The reference in Part IIA in the table below to the "Tripura Tribal Areas District" shall be 
construed as a reference to the territory comprising the tribal areas specified in the First Schedule to the 
Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council Act, 1979.] 
TABLE 
PART  I 
1. The North Cachar Hills District. 
2.  7[The Karbi Anglong District.] 
8
 [3.  The Bodoland Territorial Area District.] 
PART II 
5
 [1.  Khasi Hills District. 
2.  Jaintia Hills District.] 
3.  The Garo Hills District. 
1 
1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) and Eighth Sch., for paragraphs 20 and 20A 
(w.e.f. 21-1-1972) and paragraph 20A further substituted by the Government of Union Territory (Amendment) Act, 1971      
(83 of 1971),  s. 13 (w.e.f. 29-4-1972). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-4-1985).  
3. Subs. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39, for ―Union Territory‖ (w.e.f. 20-2-1987). 
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4, for ―any reference in the table below‖ (w.e.f. 1-4-1985). 
5. Subs. by the Government of Meghalaya notification No. DCA 31/72/11, dated the 14th June, 1973, Gazette of Meghalaya,     
Pt. VA, dated 23-6-1973, p. 200. 
6. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4(w.e.f. 1-4-1985). 
7. Subs. by the Government of Assam notification No. TAD/R/115/74/47, dated the 14-10-1976, for ―The Mikir Hills District‖. 
8. Ins. by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-9-2003).  
208 
1
 [PART IIA 
Tripura Tribal Areas District] 
2
 *   
3
 *          * 
[1. The Chakma District. 
4
 [2. The Mara District. 
3.  The Lai District.]] 
5
 Part III 
[20A. Dissolution of the Mizo District Council.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Schedule, 
the District Council of the Mizo District existing immediately before the prescribed date (hereinafter 
referred to as the Mizo District Council) shall stand dissolved and cease to exist. 
(2) The Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram may, by one or more orders, provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, rights and liabilities of the Mizo District Council 
(including the rights and liabilities under any contract made by it) to the Union or to any other 
authority; 
(b) the substitution of the Union or any other authority for the Mizo District Council, or the 
addition of the Union or any other authority, as a party to any legal proceedings to which the Mizo 
District Council is a party; 
(c) the transfer or re-employment of any employees of the Mizo District Council to or by the 
Union or any other authority, the terms and conditions of service applicable to such employees after 
such transfer or re-employment; 
(d) the continuance of any laws, made by the Mizo District Council and in force immediately 
before its dissolution, subject to such adaptations and modifications, whether by way of repeal or 
amendment, as the Administrator may make in this behalf, until such laws are altered, repealed or 
amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority; 
(e) such incidental, consequential and supplementary matters as the Administrator considers 
necessary. 
Explanation.—In this paragraph and in paragraph 20B of this Schedule, the expression ―prescribed 
date‖ means the date on which the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Mizoram is                 
duly constituted under and in accordance with the provisions of the Government of Union Territories  
Act, 1963. 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-4-1985). 
2. The words ―The Mizo District‖ omitted by the Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 1971 (83 of 1971), s. 13 
(w.e.f. 29-4-1972). 
3. Ins. by the Mizoram District Council (Miscellaneous Provisions) Order, 1972, published in the Mizoram Gazette, 1972, dated 
the 5th May, 1972, Vol. I, Pt. II, p. 17 (w.e.f. 29-4-1972). 
4. Subs. by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988 (67 of 1988), s. 2, for serial numbers 2 and 3 and the 
entries relating thereto (w.e.f. 16-12-1988). 
5. Subs. by the Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 1971 (83 of 1971), s. 13, for paragraph 20A by paragraph 
20A, 20B and 20C (w.e.f. 29-4-1972). 
209 
1-220B. Autonomous regions in the Union territory of Mizoram to be autonomous districts and 
transitory provisions consequent thereto.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Schedule,— 
(a) every autonomous region existing immediately before the prescribed date in the Union 
territory of Mizoram shall, on and from that date, be an autonomous district in that Union territory 
(hereafter referred to as the corresponding new district) and the Administrator thereof may, by one or 
more orders, direct that such consequential amendments as are necessary to give effect to the 
provisions of this clause shall be made in paragraph 20 of this Schedule (including Part III of the table 
appended to that paragraph) and thereupon the said paragraph and the said Part III shall be deemed to 
have been amended accordingly; 
(b) every Regional Council of an autonomous region in the Union territory of Mizoram existing 
immediately before the prescribed date (hereafter referred to as the existing Regional Council) shall, 
on and from that date and until a District Council is duly constituted for the corresponding new 
district, be deemed to be the District Council of that district (hereafter referred to as the 
corresponding new District Council). 
(2) Every member whether elected or nominated of an existing Regional Council shall be deemed to have 
been elected or, as the case may be, nominated to the corresponding new District Council and shall hold office 
until a District Council is duly constituted for the corresponding new district under this Schedule. 
(3) Until rules are made under sub-paragraph (7) of paragraph 2 and sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 4 
of this Schedule by the corresponding new District Council, the rules made under the said provisions by 
the existing Regional Council and in force immediately before the prescribed date shall have effect in 
relation to the corresponding new District Council subject to such adaptations and modifications as may 
be made therein by the Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram. 
(4) The Administrator of the Union territory of  Mizoram  may, by one or more orders, provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the transfer in whole or in part of the assets, rights and liabilities of the existing Regional Council 
(including the rights and liabilities under any contract made by it) to the corresponding new District 
Council; 
(b) the substitution of the corresponding new District Council for the existing Regional Council 
as a party to the legal proceedings to which the existing Regional Council is a party; 
(c) the transfer or re-employment of any employees of the existing Regional Council to or by the 
corresponding new District Council, the terms and conditions of service applicable to such employees 
after such transfer or re-employment; 
1. After paragraph 20B, the following paragraph has been inserted in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the 
Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s. 2, namely:— ―20BA. Exercise of discretionary powers by the Governor in the discharge of his functions. — The Governor in the 
discharge of his functions under sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) of paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs (1), (6), sub-paragraph (6A) 
excluding the first proviso and sub-paragraph (7) of paragraph 2, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 3, sub-paragraph (4) of 
paragraph 4, paragraph 5, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 6, sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 7, sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 
8, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 9, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 10, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 14, sub-paragraph (1) 
of paragraph 15 and sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) of paragraph 16 of this Schedule, shall, after consulting the Council of 
Ministers and the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council or the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council, as the case may be, 
take such action as he considers necessary in his  discretion.‖ . 
2.  After paragraph 20B, the following paragraph has been inserted in its application to the States of Tripura and Mizoram, by the 
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988 (67 of 1988), s. 2, namely: — ―20BB. Exercise of discretionary powers by the Governor in the discharge of his functions.-The Governor, in the discharge 
of his functions under sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) of paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs (1) and (7) of paragraph 2, sub-paragraph (3) 
of paragraph 3, sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 4, paragraph 5, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 6, sub-paragraph (2) of 
paragraph 7, sub-paragraph (3) of  paragraph 9, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 14, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 15 and sub
paragraphs (1)  and (2) of paragraph 16 of this Schedule, shall, after consulting the Council of Ministers, and if he thinks it 
necessary, the District Council or the Regional Council concerned, take such action as he considers necessary in his discretion.‖ 
. 
210 
(d) the continuance of any laws made by the existing Regional Council and in force immediately 
before the prescribed date, subject to such adaptations and modifications, whether by way of repeal or 
amendment, as the Administrator may make in this behalf until such laws are altered, repealed or 
amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority; 
(e) such incidental, consequential and supplementary matters as the Administrator considers 
necessary. 
20C. Interpretation.—Subject to any provision made in this behalf, the provisions of this Schedule 
shall, in their application to the Union territory of Mizoram, have effect— 
(1) as if references to the Governor and Government of the State were references to the 
Administrator of the Union territory appointed under article 239, references to State (except in the 
expression "Government of the State") were references to the Union territory of Mizoram and 
references to the State Legislature were references to the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory 
of Mizoram; 
(2) as if— 
(a) in sub-paragraph (5) of paragraph 4, the provision for consultation with the Government 
of the State concerned had been omitted; 
(b) in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 6, for the words "to which the executive power of the 
State extends", the words "with respect to which the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory 
of Mizoram has power to make laws" had been substituted; 
(c) in paragraph 13, the words and figures ―under article 202‖ had been omitted. 
21. Amendment of the Schedule.—(1) Parliament may from time to time by law amend by way of 
addition, variation or repeal any of the provisions of this Schedule and, when the Schedule is so amended, 
any reference to this Schedule in this Constitution shall be construed as a reference to such Schedule as so 
amended. 
(2) No such law as is mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be deemed to be an 
amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368. 
211 
SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
(Article 246) 
List I—Union List 
1. Defence of India and every part thereof including preparation for defence and all such acts as may 
be conducive in times of war to its prosecution and after its termination to effective demobilisation. 
2. Naval, military and air forces; any other armed forces of the Union. 
1
 [2A. Deployment of any armed force of the Union or any other force subject to the control of the 
Union or any contingent or unit thereof in any State in aid of the civil power; powers, jurisdiction, 
privileges and liabilities of the members of such forces while on such deployment.] 
3. Delimitation of cantonment areas, local self-government in such areas, the constitution and powers 
within such areas of cantonment authorities and the regulation of house accommodation (including the 
control of rents) in such areas. 
4. Naval, military and air force works. 
5. Arms, firearms, ammunition and explosives. 
6. Atomic energy and mineral resources necessary for its production. 
7. Industries declared by Parliament by law to be necessary for the purpose of defence or for the 
prosecution of war. 
8. Central Bureau of Intelligence and Investigation. 
9. Preventive detention for reasons connected with Defence, Foreign Affairs, or the security of India; 
persons subjected to such detention. 
10. Foreign affairs; all matters which bring the Union into relation with any foreign country. 
11. Diplomatic, consular and trade representation. 
12. United Nations Organisation. 
13. Participation in international conferences, associations and other bodies and implementing of 
decisions made thereat. 
14. Entering into treaties and agreements with foreign countries and implementing of treaties, 
agreements and conventions with foreign countries. 
15. War and peace. 
16. Foreign jurisdiction. 
17. Citizenship, naturalisation and aliens. 
18. Extradition. 
19. Admission into, and emigration and expulsion from, India; passports and visas. 
20. Pilgrimages to places outside India. 
21. Piracies and crimes committed on the high seas or in the air; offences against the law of nations 
committed on land or the high seas or in the air. 
22. Railways. 
1.Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).  
212 
23. Highways declared by or under law made by Parliament to be national highways. 
24. Shipping and navigation on inland waterways, declared by Parliament by law to be national 
waterways, as regards mechanically propelled vessels; the rule of the road on such waterways. 
25. Maritime shipping and navigation, including shipping and navigation on tidal waters; provision of 
education and training for the mercantile marine and regulation of such education and training provided 
by States and other agencies. 
26. Lighthouses, including lightships, beacons and other provision for the safety of shipping and 
aircraft. 
27. Ports declared by or under law made by Parliament or existing law to be major ports, including 
their delimitation, and the constitution and powers of port authorities therein. 
28. Port quarantine, including hospitals connected therewith; seamen's and marine hospitals. 
29. Airways; aircraft and air navigation; provision of aerodromes; regulation and organisation of air 
traffic and of aerodromes; provision for aeronautical education and training and regulation of such 
education and training provided by States and other agencies. 
30. Carriage of passengers and goods by railway, sea or air, or by national waterways in mechanically 
propelled vessels. 
31. Posts and telegraphs; telephones, wireless, broadcasting and other like forms of communication. 
32. Property of the Union and the revenue therefrom, but as regards property situated in a State 1*** 
subject to legislation by the State, save in so far as Parliament by law otherwise provides. 
2
 *      
*         
*   
34. Courts of wards for the estates of Rulers of Indian States. 
35. Public debt of the Union. 
36. Currency, coinage and legal tender;  foreign exchange. 
37. Foreign loans. 
38. Reserve Bank of India. 
39. Post Office Savings Bank. 
*                         
40. Lotteries organised by the Government of India or the Government of a State. 
* 
41. Trade and commerce with foreign countries; import and export across customs frontiers; 
definition of customs frontiers. 
42. Inter-State trade and commerce. 
43. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of trading corporations, including banking, insurance 
and financial corporations, but not including co-operative societies. 
44. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, whether trading or not, with objects not 
confined to one State, but not including universities. 
45. Banking. 
46. Bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes and other like instruments. 
47. Insurance. 
1. The words and letter ―specified in Part A of the First Schedule‖ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, 
s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Entry 33 omitted by s. 26, ibid. 
213 
48. Stock exchanges and futures markets. 
49. Patents, inventions and designs; copyright; trade-marks and merchandise marks. 
50. Establishment of standards of weight and measure. 
51. Establishment of standards of quality for goods to be exported out of India or transported from 
one State to another. 
52. Industries, the control of which by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in 
the public interest. 
53. Regulation and development of oilfields and mineral oil resources; petroleum and petroleum 
products; other liquids and substances declared by Parliament by law to be dangerously inflammable. 
54. Regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent to which such regulation and 
development under the control of the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public 
interest. 
55. Regulation of labour and safety in mines and oilfields. 
56. Regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent to which such 
regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be 
expedient in the public interest. 
57. Fishing and fisheries beyond territorial waters. 
58. Manufacture, supply and distribution of salt by Union agencies; regulation and control of 
manufacture, supply and distribution of salt by other agencies. 
59. Cultivation, manufacture, and sale for export, of opium. 
60. Sanctioning of cinematograph films for exhibition. 
61. Industrial disputes concerning Union employees. 
62. The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the National Library, the 
Indian Museum, the Imperial War Museum, the Victoria Memorial and the Indian War Memorial, and 
any other like institution financed by the Government of India wholly or in  part and declared by 
Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance. 
63. The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the Benares Hindu University, the 
Aligarh Muslim University and the 1[Delhi University; the University established in pursuance of article 
371E;] any other institution declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance. 
64. Institutions for scientific or technical education financed by the Government of India wholly or in 
part and declared by Parliament by law to be institutions of national importance. 
65. Union agencies and institutions for— 
(a) professional, vocational or technical training, including the training of police officers; or 
(b) the promotion of special studies or research; or 
(c) scientific or technical assistance in the investigation or detection of crime. 
66. Co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher education or research and 
scientific and technical institutions. 
67. Ancient and historical monuments and records, and archaeological sites and remains, 2[declared 
by or under law made by Parliament] to be of national importance. 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 4, for ―Delhi University and‖ (w.e.f. 1-7-1974). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for ―declared by Parliament by law‖ (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
214 
68. The Survey of India, the Geological, Botanical, Zoological and Anthropological Surveys of India; 
Meteorological organisations. 
69.  Census. 
70. Union Public Service; All-India Services; Union Public Service Commission. 
71. Union pensions, that is to say, pensions payable by the Government of India or out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 
72. Elections to Parliament, to the Legislatures of States and to the offices of President and Vice
President; the Election Commission. 
73. Salaries and allowances of members of Parliament, the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the 
Council of States and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People. 
74. Powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament and of the members and the 
Committees of each House; enforcement of attendance of persons for giving evidence or producing 
documents before committees of Parliament or commissions appointed by Parliament. 
75. Emoluments, allowances, privileges, and rights in respect of leave of absence, of the President 
and Governors; salaries and allowances of the Ministers for the Union; the salaries, allowances, and rights 
in respect of leave of absence and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
76. Audit of the accounts of the Union and of the States. 
77. Constitution, organisation, jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court (including contempt of 
such Court), and the fees taken therein; persons entitled to practise before the Supreme Court. 
78. Constitution and organisation 1[(including vacations)] of the High Courts except provisions as to 
officers and servants of High Courts; persons entitled to practise before the High Courts. 
2
 [79. Extension of the jurisdiction of a High Court to, and exclusion of the jurisdiction of a High 
Court from, any Union territory.] 
80. Extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force belonging to any State to 
any area outside that State, but not so as to enable the police of one State to exercise powers and 
jurisdiction in any area outside that State without the consent of the Government of the State in which 
such area is situated; extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force belonging to 
any State to railway areas outside that State. 
81. Inter-State migration; inter-State quarantine. 
82. Taxes on income other than agricultural income. 
83. Duties of customs including export duties. 
3
 [84. Duties of excise on the following goods manufactured or produced in India, namely:— 
(a) petroleum crude; 
(b) high speed diesel; 
(c) motor spirit (commonly known as petrol); 
(d) natural gas; 
(e) aviation turbine fuel; and 
(f) tobacco and tobacco products.] 
85. Corporation tax. 
86. Taxes on the capital value of the assets, exclusive of agricultural land, of individuals and 
companies; taxes on the capital of companies. 
87. Estate duty in respect of property other than agricultural land. 
1.Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 12 (with retrospective effect). 
2.Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
3. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 17(a)(i) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).  
215 
88. Duties in respect of succession to property other than agricultural land. 
89. Terminal taxes on goods or passengers, carried by railway, sea or air; taxes on railway fares and 
freights. 
90. Taxes other than stamp duties on transactions in stock exchanges and futures markets. 
91. Rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes, bills of lading, 
letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer of shares, debentures, proxies and receipts. 
1
 *            
2
 *                   
*                
*              
* 
[92A. Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, where such sale or purchase 
takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.] 
3
 [92B. Taxes on the consignments of goods (whether the consignment is to the person making it or to 
any other person), where such consignment takes place in the course of inter-State trade or  commerce.] 
4
 *                   
*                   
*            
93. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List. 
*          
* 
94. Inquires, surveys and statistics for the purpose of any of the matters in this List. 
95. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect to any of the matters 
in this List; admiralty jurisdiction. 
96. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any court. 
97. Any other matter not enumerated in List II or List III including any tax not mentioned in either of 
those Lists. 
List II—State List 
1. Public order (but not including 5[the use of any naval, military or air force or any other armed force 
of the Union or of any other force subject to the control of the Union or of any contingent or unit thereof] 
in aid of the civil power). 
6
 [2. Police (including railway and village police) subject to the provisions of entry 2A of List I.] 
3. 7*** Officers and servants of the High Court; procedure in rent and revenue courts; fees taken in all 
all courts except the Supreme Court. 
4. Prisons, reformatories, Borstal institutions and other institutions of a like nature, and persons 
detained therein; arrangements with other States for the use of prisons and other institutions. 
5. Local government, that is to say, the constitution and powers of municipal corporations, 
improvement trusts, districts boards, mining settlement authorities and other local authorities for the 
purpose of local self-government or village administration. 
6. Public health and sanitation; hospitals and dispensaries. 
7. Pilgrimages, other than pilgrimages to places outside India. 
8. Intoxicating liquors, that is to say, the production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and 
sale of intoxicating liquors. 
9. Relief of the disabled and unemployable. 
10. Burials and burial grounds; cremations and cremation grounds. 
1. Entry 92 omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 17(a)(ii) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11-9-1956). 
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982, s.5(w.e.f. 2-2-1983). 
4. Entry 92C was inserted by the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 4.  For the text of that Act, see 
Appendix-III (not enforced) and omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act 2016,s. 17(a)(ii)         
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57, for certain words (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).  
6. Subs. by ibid., for Entry 2.  
7. Certain words omitted by ibid. 
216 
111.*   
*      
*                 
*   
*                
12. Libraries, museums and other similar institutions controlled or financed by the State; ancient and  
historical monuments and records other than those 2[declared by or under law made by Parliament] to be 
of national importance. 
13. Communications, that is to say, roads, bridges, ferries, and other means of communication not 
specified in List I; municipal tramways; ropeways; inland waterways and traffic thereon subject to the 
provisions of List I and List III with regard to such waterways; vehicles other than mechanically 
propelled vehicles. 
14. Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection against pests and prevention 
of plant diseases. 
15. Preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal diseases; veterinary 
training and practice. 
16. Pounds and the prevention of cattle trespass. 
17. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and embankments, water 
storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 56 of List I. 
18. Land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land tenures including the relation of landlord and 
tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and 
agricultural loans; colonization. 
3
 [19. *       
20. *       
*                
*                       
21. Fisheries. 
       *                 
*                          
         *                   
*                   
     *   
     *] 
22. Courts of wards subject to the provisions of entry 34 of List I; encumbered and attached estates. 
23. Regulation of mines and mineral development subject to the provisions of List I with respect to 
regulation and development under the control of the Union. 
24. Industries subject to the provisions of 4[entries 7 and 52] of List I. 
25. Gas and gas-works. 
26. Trade and commerce within the State subject to the provisions of entry 33 of List III. 
27. Production, supply and distribution of goods subject to the provisions of entry 33 of List III. 
28. Markets and fairs. 
329*              
          *           
                *                          
    *                             
30. Money-lending and money-lenders; relief of agricultural indebtedness. 
31. Inns and inn-keepers. 
* 
32. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, other than those specified in List I, and 
universities; unincorporated trading, literary, scientific, religious and other societies and associations; co
operative societies. 
33. Theatres and dramatic performances; cinemas subject to the provisions of entry 60 of List I; 
sports, entertainments and amusements. 
1. Entry 11 omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).  
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for ―declared by parliament by law‖ (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
3. Entries19, 20 and 29 omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).  
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 28, for ―entry 52‖ (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
217 
34. Betting and gambling. 
35. Works,  lands and buildings vested in or in the possession of the State. 
1
 [*   
*   
*   
*              
*] 
37. Elections to the Legislature of the State subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament. 
38. Salaries and allowances of members of the Legislature of the State, of the Speaker and Deputy 
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and, if there is a Legislative Council, of the Chairman and Deputy 
Chairman thereof. 
39. Powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assembly and of the members and the 
committees thereof, and, if there is a Legislative Council, of that Council and of the members and the 
committees thereof; enforcement of attendance of persons for giving evidence or producing documents 
before committees of the Legislature of the State. 
40. Salaries and allowances of Ministers for the State. 
41. State public services; State Public Service Commission. 
42. State pensions, that is to say, pensions payable by the State or out of the Consolidated Fund of the 
State. 
43. Public debt of the State. 
44. Treasure trove. 
45. Land revenue, including the assessment and collection of revenue, the maintenance of land 
records, survey for revenue purposes and records of rights, and alienation of revenues. 
46. Taxes on agricultural income. 
47. Duties in respect of succession to agricultural land. 
48. Estate duty in respect of agricultural land. 
49. Taxes on lands and buildings. 
50. Taxes on mineral rights subject to any limitations imposed by Parliament by law relating to 
mineral development. 
51. Duties of excise on the following goods manufactured or produced in the State and countervailing 
duties at the same or lower rates on similar goods manufactured or produced elsewhere in India:— 
(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption; 
(b) opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, 
but not including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any substance included in sub
paragraph (b) of this entry. 
2
 *                   
*             
*                   
53. Taxes on the consumption or sale of electricity. 
3
 *                    
* 
[54. Taxes on the sale of petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (commonly known as 
petrol), natural gas, aviation turbine fuel and alcoholic liquor for human consumption, but not including 
sale in the course of inter-State trade or commerce or sale in the course of international trade or 
commerce of such goods.] 
4
 *                   
*               
*            
*       
56. Taxes on goods and passengers carried by road or on inland waterways. 
* 
1. Entry 36 omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Entry 52 omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 17(b)(i) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
3.Subs. by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 2, for entry 54 (w.e.f. 11-9-1956) and further substituted by the 
Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 17(b)(ii) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
4. Ins.by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (One 
Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 17(b)(iii) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
218 
57. Taxes on vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for use on roads, including 
tramcars subject to the provisions of entry 35 of List III. 
58. Taxes on animals and boats. 
59. Tolls. 
60. Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments. 
61. Capitation taxes. 
1
 [62. Taxes on entertainments and amusements to the extent levied and collected by a Panchayat or a 
Municipality or a Regional Council or a District Council.] 
63. Rates of stamp duty in respect of documents other than those specified in the provisions of List I 
with regard to rates of stamp duty. 
64. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List. 
65. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect to any of the matters 
in this List. 
66. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any court. 
List III—Concurrent List 
1. Criminal law, including all matters included in the Indian Penal Code at the commencement of this 
Constitution but excluding offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified in List I or 
List II and excluding the use of naval, military or air forces or any other armed forces of the Union in aid 
of the civil power. 
2. Criminal procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Criminal Procedure at the 
commencement of this Constitution. 
3. Preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of a State, the maintenance of public 
order, or the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community; persons subjected to such 
detention. 
4. Removal from one State to another State of prisoners, accused persons and persons subjected to 
preventive detention for reasons specified in entry 3 of this List. 
5. Marriage and divorce; infants and minors; adoption; wills, intestacy and succession; joint family 
and partition; all matters in respect of which parties in judicial proceedings were immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution subject to their personal law. 
6. Transfer of property other than agricultural land; registration of deeds and documents. 
7. Contracts, including partnership, agency, contracts of carriage, and other special forms of 
contracts, but not including contracts relating to agricultural land. 
8.  Actionable wrongs. 
9.  Bankruptcy and insolvency. 
10. Trust and Trustees. 
11.  Administrators-general and official trustees. 
2
 [11A. Administration of Justice; constitution and organisation of all courts, except the Supreme 
Court and the High Courts.] 
12. Evidence and oaths; recognition of laws, public acts and records, and judicial proceedings. 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016,s. 17(b)(iv) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).  
219 
13. Civil procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Civil Procedure at the 
commencement of this Constitution, limitation and arbitration. 
14. Contempt of court, but not including contempt of the Supreme Court. 
15. Vagrancy; nomadic and migratory tribes. 
16. Lunacy and mental deficiency, including places for the reception or treatment of lunatics and 
mental deficients. 
17. Prevention of cruelty to animals. 
1
 [17A.  Forests. 
17B. Protection of wild animals and birds.] 
18. Adulteration of foodstuffs and other goods. 
19. Drugs and poisons, subject to the provisions of entry 59 of List I with respect to opium. 
20. Economic and social planning. 
1
 [20A. Population control and family planning.] 
21. Commercial and industrial monopolies, combines and trusts. 
22. Trade unions; industrial and labour disputes. 
23. Social security and social insurance; employment and unemployment. 
24. Welfare of labour including conditions of work, provident funds, employers' liability, workmen's 
compensation, invalidity and old age pensions and maternity benefits. 
2
 [25. Education, including technical education, medical education and universities, subject to the 
provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I; vocational and technical training of labour.] 
26. Legal, medical and other professions. 
27. Relief and rehabilitation of persons displaced from their original place of residence by reason of 
the setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan. 
28. Charities   and   charitable  institutions,  charitable   and   religious  endowments and religious 
institutions. 
29. Prevention of the extension from one State to another of infectious or contagious diseases or pests 
affecting men, animals or plants. 
30. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths. 
31. Ports other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament or existing law to be major 
ports. 
32. Shipping and navigation on inland waterways as regards mechanically propelled vessels, and the 
rule of the road on such waterways, and the carriage of passengers and goods on inland waterways subject 
to the provisions of List I with respect to national waterways. 
3
 [33. Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of,— 
(a) the products of any industry where the control of such industry by the Union is declared by 
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest, and imported goods of the same kind as such 
products; 
(b) foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils; 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).  
2. Subs. by ibid., for entry 25.  
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Third Amendment) Act, 1954, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22-2-1955). 
220 
(c) cattle fodder, including oilcakes and other concentrates; 
(d) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginned, and cotton seed; and 
(e) raw jute.] 
1
 [33A.  Weights and measures except establishment of standards.] 
34.   Price control.  
35. Mechanically propelled vehicles including the principles on which taxes on such vehicles are to 
be levied. 
36. Factories 
37. Boilers. 
38. Electricity. 
39. Newspapers, books and printing presses. 
40. Archaeological sites and remains other than those 2[declared by or under law made by Parliament] 
to be of national importance. 
41. Custody, management and disposal of property (including agricultural land) declared by law to be 
evacuee property. 
3
 [42. Acquisition and requisitioning of property.] 
43. Recovery in a State of claims in respect of taxes and other public demands, including arrears of 
land-revenue and sums recoverable as such arrears, arising outside that State. 
44. Stamp duties other than duties or fees collected by means of judicial stamps, but not including 
rates of stamp duty. 
45. Inquiries and statistics for the purposes of any of the matters specified in List II or List III. 
46. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect to any of the matters 
in this List. 
47. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees taken in any court. 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).  
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for ―declared by Parliament by law‖ (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
3. Subs. by s. 26, ibid. 
221 
EIGHTH SCHEDULE 
[Articles 344(1) and 351] 
Languages 
1. Assamese. 
2. Bengali. 
1
 [3. Bodo. 
4. Dogri.] 
2
 [5.] Gujarati. 
3
 [6.] Hindi. 
3
 [7.] Kannada. 
3
 [8.] Kashmiri. 
4
 [3[9.] Konkani. 
1
 [10. Maithili.] 
5
 [11.] Malayalam. 
4
 [6[12.] Manipuri.] 
6
 [13.] Marathi. 
4
 [6[14.] Nepali.] 
6
 [15.]7[Odia]. 
6
 [16.] Punjabi. 
6
 [17.] Sanskrit. 
1
 [18. Santhali.] 
8
 [9[19.] Sindhi.] 
10[20. Tamil. 
10[21. Telugu. 
10[22.  Urdu  
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).  
2. Entry 3 renumbered as entry 5 by ibid. 
3. Entries 4 to 7 renumbered as entries 6 to 9 by ibid. 
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-first Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31-8-1992). 
5. Entry 8 renumbered as entry 11 by the Constitution (Ninety-second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-1-2004). 
6. Entry 9 to 14 renumbered as entry 12 to 17 by ibid. 
7. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-sixth Amendment) Act, 2011, s. 2, for ―Oriya‖ (w.e.f. 23-9-2011). 
8. Added by the Constitution (Twenty-first Amendment) Act, 1967, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10-4-1967). 
9. Entry 15 renumbered as entry 19 by the Constitution (Ninety-second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-1-2004). 
10. Entry 16 to 18 renumbered as entry 20 to 22 by ibid. 
222 
1
 [NINTH SCHEDULE 
(Article 31B) 
1. The Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Bihar Act XXX of 1950). 
2. The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 (Bombay Act LXVII of 1948). 
3. The Bombay Maleki Tenure Abolition Act, 1949 (Bombay Act LXI of 1949). 
4. The Bombay Taluqdari Tenure Abolition Act, 1949 (Bombay Act LXII of 1949). 
5. The Panch Mahals Mehwassi Tenure Abolition Act, 1949 (Bombay Act LXIII of 1949). 
6. The Bombay Khoti Abolition Act, 1950 (Bombay Act VI of 1950). 
7. The Bombay Paragana and Kulkarni Watan Abolition Act, 1950 (Bombay Act LX of 1950). 
8. The Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estates, Mahals, Alienated Lands) Act, 1950 
(Madhya Pradesh Act I of 1951). 
9. The Madras Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1948 (Madras Act XXVI        
of 1948). 
10. The Madras Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Amendment Act, 1950 (Madras 
Act I of 1950). 
11. The Uttar Pradesh  Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Uttar Pradesh Act I of 
1951). 
12. The Hyderabad (Abolition of Jagirs) Regulation, 1358F (No. LXIX of 1358, Fasli). 
13. The Hyderabad Jagirs (Commutation) Regulation, 1359F (No. XXV of 1359, Fasli).] 
2
 [14. The Bihar Displaced Persons Rehabilitation (Acquisition of Land) Act, 1950 (Bihar Act 
XXXVIII of 1950). 
15. The United Provinces Land Acquisition (Rehabilitation of Refugees) Act, 1948 (U.P. Act XXVI 
of 1948). 
16. The Resettlement of Displaced Persons (Land Acquisition) Act, 1948 (Act LX of 1948). 
17. Sections 52A to 52G of the Insurance Act, 1938 (Act IV of 1938), as inserted by section 42 of the 
Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950 (Act XLVII of 1950). 
18. The Railway Companies (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1951 (Act LI of 1951). 
19. Chapter III-A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (Act LXV of 1951), as 
inserted by section 13 of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 1953 (Act XXVI 
of 1953). 
20. The West Bengal Land Development and Planning Act, 1948 (West Bengal Act XXI of 1948), as 
amended by West Bengal Act XXIX of 1951.] 
3
 [21. The Andhra Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1961 (Andhra Pradesh Act X of 
1961). 
22. The Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Validation) Act, 1961 
(Andhra Pradesh Act XXI of 1961). 
23. The Andhra  Pradesh (Telangana Area) Ijara and Kowli Land Cancellation of Irregular Pattas and 
Abolition of Concessional Assessment Act, 1961 (Andhra Pradesh Act XXXVI of 1961). 
1. Added by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 14 (w.e.f. 18-6-1951). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 5 (w.e.f. 27-4-1955). 
3.Ins. by the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20-6-1964). 
223 
24. The Assam State Acquisition of Lands belonging to Religious or Charitable Institution of Public 
Nature Act, 1959 (Assam Act IX of 1961). 
25. The Bihar Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1953 (Bihar Act XX of 1954). 
26. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) Act, 1961 
(Bihar Act XII of 1962),  except section 28 of this Act. 
27. The Bombay Taluqdari Tenure Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1954 (Bombay Act I of 1955). 
28. The Bombay Taluqdari Tenure Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1957 (Bombay Act XVIII of 1958). 
29. The Bombay Inams (Kutch Area) Abolition Act, 1958 (Bombay Act XCVIII of 1958). 
30. The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1960 (Gujarat Act XVI 
of 1960). 
31. The Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling Act, 1960 (Gujarat Act XXVI of 1961). 
32. The Sagbara and Mehwassi Estates (Proprietary Rights Abolition, etc.) Regulation, 1962 (Gujarat 
Regulation I of 1962). 
33. The Gujarat Surviving Alienations Abolition Act, 1963 (Gujarat Act XXXIII of 1963), except in 
so far as this Act relates to an alienation referred to in sub-clause (d) of clause (3) of section 2 thereof. 
34. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) Act, 1961 (Maharashtra Act XXVII of 
1961). 
35. The Hyderabad Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Re-enactment, Validation and Further Amendment) 
Act, 1961 (Maharashtra Act XLV of 1961). 
36. The Hyderabad Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1950 (Hyderabad Act XXI of 1950). 
37. The Jenmikaram Payment (Abolition) Act, 1960 (Kerala Act III of 1961). 
38. The Kerala Land Tax Act, 1961 (Kerala Act XIII of 1961). 
39. The Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963 (Kerala Act I of 1964).  
40. The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (Madhya Pradesh Act XX of 1959). 
41. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1960 (Madhya Pradesh Act XX of 
1960). 
42. The Madras Cultivating Tenants Protection Act, 1955 (Madras Act XXV of 1955). 
43. The Madras Cultivating Tenants (Payment of Fair Rent) Act, 1956 (Madras Act XXIV of 1956). 
44. The Madras Occupants of Kudiyiruppu (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1961 (Madras Act 
XXXVIII of 1961). 
45. The  Madras  Public  Trusts  (Regulation  of  Administration  of Agricultural Lands) Act, 1961 
(Madras Act LVII of 1961). 
46. The Madras Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961 (Madras Act LVIII of 1961). 
47. The Mysore  Tenancy Act, 1952 (Mysore Act XIII of 1952). 
48. The Coorg Tenants Act, 1957 (Mysore Act XIV of 1957). 
49. The Mysore Village Offices Abolition Act, 1961 (Mysore Act XIV of 1961). 
50. The Hyderabad Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Validation) Act, 1961 (Mysore Act XXXVI     
of 1961). 
51. The Mysore Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Mysore Act X of 1962). 
224 
52. The Orissa Land Reforms Act, 1960 (Orissa Act XVI of 1960). 
53. The Orissa Merged Territories (Village Offices Abolition) Act, 1963 (Orissa Act X of 1963). 
54. The Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953 (Punjab Act X of 1953). 
55. The Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 (Rajasthan Act III of 1955). 
56. The Rajasthan Zamindari and Biswedari Abolition Act, 1959 (Rajasthan Act VIII of 1959). 
57. The Kumaun and Uttarakhand Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1960 (Uttar Pradesh 
Act XVII of 1960). 
58. The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960 (Uttar Pradesh Act I          
of 1961). 
59. The West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 (West Bengal Act I of 1954). 
60. The West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 (West Bengal Act X of 1956).  
61. The Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 (Delhi Act VIII of 1954). 
62. The Delhi Land Holdings (Ceiling) Act, 1960 (Central Act 24 of 1960). 
63. The Manipur Land Revenue and Land Reforms Act, 1960 (Central Act 33 of 1960). 
64. The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms Act, 1960 (Central Act 43 of 1960).] 
1
 [65. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1969 (Kerala Act 35 of 1969). 
66. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1971 (Kerala Act 25 of 1971).] 
2
 [67. The Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms (Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings) Act, 1973 (Andhra 
Pradesh Act 1 of 1973). 
68. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) 
(Amendment) Act, 1972 (Bihar Act I of 1973). 
69. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) 
(Amendment) Act, 1973 (Bihar Act IX of 1973). 
70. The Bihar Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Bihar Act V of  1972). 
71. The Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Gujarat Act 2 of 1974). 
72. The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1972 (Haryana Act 26 of 1972). 
73. The Himachal Pradesh Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1972 (Himachal Pradesh Act 19 of 1973). 
74. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Kerala Act 17 of 1972). 
75. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Madhya Pradesh 
Act 12 of 1974). 
76. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Second Amendment) Act, 1972 (Madhya 
Pradesh Act 13 of 1974). 
77. The Mysore Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1973 (Karnataka Act 1 of 1974). 
78. The Punjab Land Reforms Act, 1972 (Punjab Act 10 of 1973). 
79. The Rajasthan Imposition of Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1973 (Rajasthan Act 11 of 
1973). 
80. The Gudalur Janmam Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1969 (Tamil Nadu 
Act 24 of 1969). 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1972, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9-6-1972). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-9-1974). 
225 
81.  The  West   Bengal  Land  Reforms  (Amendment)  Act,  1972  (West Bengal Act XII of 1972). 
82. The West Bengal Estates Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1964 (West Bengal Act XXII of 1964). 
83. The West Bengal Estates Acquisition (Second Amendment) Act, 1973 (West Bengal Act XXXIII 
of 1973). 
84. The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1972 (Gujarat Act 5       
of 1973). 
85. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1974 (Orissa Act 9 of 1974). 
86. The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act,1974 (Tripura Act 7          
of 1974).] 
1
 [287.*                     
*                       
   *    
*                    
*] 
88. The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (Central Act 65 of 1951). 
89. The Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952 (Central Act 30 of 1952). 
90. The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957 (Central Act 67 of 1957). 
*91. The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (Central Act 54 of 1969). 
2
 [92. *                     
*             
*                      
*          
93. The Coking Coal Mines (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971 (Central Act 64 of 1971). 
94. The Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (Central Act 36 of 1972). 
95. The General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (Central Act 57 of 1972). 
*] 
96. The Indian Copper Corporation (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1972 (Central Act 58 of 1972). 
97. The Sick Textile Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1972 (Central Act 72 of 
1972). 
98. The Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973 (Central Act 15 of 1973). 
99. The Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 (Central Act 26 of 1973). 
**100. The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (Central Act 46 of 1973). 
101. The  Alcock  Ashdown  Company  Limited  (Acquisition  of Undertakings) Act, 1973 (Central 
Act 56 of 1973). 
102. The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974 (Central Act 28 of 1974). 
103. The Additional Emoluments (Compulsory Deposit) Act, 1974 (Central Act 37 of 1974). 
104. The Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 
(Central Act 52 of 1974). 
105. The Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1974 (Central Act 57 of 1974). 
106. The  Maharashtra  Agricultural  Lands  (Ceiling  on  Holdings) (Amendment) Act, 1964 
(Maharashtra Act XVI of 1965). 
107. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Amendment) Act, 1965 
(Maharashtra Act XXXII of 1965). 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5(w.e.f. 10-8-1975).  
2. Entries 87 and 92 omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 44 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
* Rep. by the Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003) (w.e.f. 1-9-2009). 
** Rep. by the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) (w.e.f. 1-6-2000).  
226 
108. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Amendment) Act, 1968 
(Maharashtra Act XVI of 1968). 
109. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Second Amendment) Act, 1968 
(Maharashtra Act XXXIII of 1968). 
110. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Amendment) Act, 1969 
(Maharashtra Act XXXVII of 1969). 
111. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Second Amendment) Act, 1969 
(Maharashtra Act XXXVIII of 1969). 
112. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Amendment) Act, 1970 
(Maharashtra Act XXVII of 1970). 
113. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Amendment) Act, 1972 
(Maharashtra Act XIII of 1972). 
114. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Amendment) Act, 1973 
(Maharashtra Act L of 1973). 
115. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1965 (Orissa Act 13 of 1965). 
116. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1966 (Orissa Act 8 of 1967). 
117. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1967 (Orissa Act 13 of 1967). 
118. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1969 (Orissa Act 13 of 1969). 
119. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970 (Orissa Act 18 of 1970). 
120. The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Uttar 
Pradesh  Act 18 of 1973). 
121. The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1974 (Uttar 
Pradesh  Act 2 of 1975). 
122. The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms  (Third Amendment) Act, 1975 (Tripura Act 3 of 
1975). 
123.The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Land Reforms Regulation, 1971 (3 of 1971). 
124. The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Land Reforms (Amendment)  Regulation, 1973 (5 of 1973).] 
1
 [125. Section 66A and Chapter IVA of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939* (Central Act 4 of 1939). 
126. The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (Central Act 10 of 1955). 
127. The Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976 (Central 
Act 13 of 1976). 
128. The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 (Central Act 19 of 1976). 
129. The Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities (Amendment) 
Act, 1976 (Central Act 20 of 1976). 
2
 [130.*    
*                          
*      *                    
*] 
131. The Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund Act, 1976 (Central Act 31 of 1976). 
132. The Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 (Central Act 33 of 1976). 
1. Entries 125 to 188 ins. by the Constitution (Fortieth Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976). 
* See now the relevant provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988). 
2. Entry 130 omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 44(w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
227 
133. The Departmentalisation of Union Accounts (Transfer of Personnel) Act, 1976 (Central Act 59 
of 1976). 
134. The Assam Fixation of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1956 (Assam Act 1 of 1957). 
135. The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Vidarbha Region) Act, 1958 (Bombay Act XCIX 
of 1958). 
136. The Gujarat Private Forests (Acquisition) Act, 1972 (Gujarat Act 14 of 1973). 
137. The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Haryana Act 17 of 1976). 
138. The Himachal Pradesh Tenancy and Land Reforms Act, 1972 (Himachal Pradesh Act 8 of 
1974). 
139. The Himachal Pradesh Village Common Lands Vesting and Utilisation Act, 1974 (Himachal 
Pradesh Act 18 of 1974). 
140. The Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1974 
(Karnataka Act 31 of 1974). 
141. The Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1976). 
142. The Kerala Prevention of Eviction Act, 1966 (Kerala Act 12 of 1966). 
143. The Thiruppuvaram Payment (Abolition) Act, 1969 (Kerala Act 19 of 1969). 
144. The Sreepadam Lands Enfranchisement Act, 1969 (Kerala Act 20 of 1969). 
145. The Sree Pandaravaka Lands (Vesting and Enfranchisement) Act, 1971 (Kerala Act 20 of 1971). 
146. The Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and Assignment) Act, 1971 (Kerala Act 26 of 1971). 
147. The Kerala Agricultural Workers Act, 1974 (Kerala Act 18 of 1974). 
148. The Kerala Cashew Factories (Acquisition) Act, 1974 (Kerala Act 29 of 1974). 
149. The Kerala Chitties Act, 1975 (Kerala Act 23 of 1975). 
150. The Kerala Scheduled Tribes (Restriction on Transfer of Lands and Restoration of Alienated 
Lands) Act, 1975 (Kerala Act 31 of 1975). 
151.  The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Kerala Act 15 of 1976). 
152. The Kanam Tenancy Abolition Act, 1976 (Kerala Act 16 of 1976). 
153. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1974 (Madhya 
Pradesh Act 20 of 1974). 
154. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings  (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Madhya 
Pradesh Act 2 of 1976). 
155. The West Khandesh Mehwassi Estates (Proprietary Rights Abolition, etc.) Regulation, 1961 
(Maharashtra Regulation 1 of 1962). 
156. The Maharashtra Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes Act, 1974 (Maharashtra Act XIV of 
1975). 
157. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Lowering of Ceiling on Holdings) and (Amendment) Act, 
1972 (Maharashtra Act XXI of 1975). 
158. The Maharashtra Private Forest (Acquisition) Act, 1975 (Maharashtra Act XXIX of 1975). 
159. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Lowering of Ceiling on Holdings) and (Amendment) 
Amendment Act, 1975 (Maharashtra Act XLVII of 1975). 
228 
160. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Amendment) Act, 1975 
(Maharashtra Act II of 1976). 
161. The Orissa Estates Abolition Act, 1951 (Orissa Act I of 1952). 
162. The Rajasthan Colonisation Act, 1954 (Rajasthan Act XXVII of 1954). 
163. The Rajasthan Land Reforms and Acquisition of Landowners‘ Estates Act, 1963 (Rajasthan Act 
11 of 1964). 
164. The Rajasthan Imposition of Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1976 
(Rajasthan Act 8 of 1976). 
165. The Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Rajasthan Act 12 of 1976). 
166. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Reduction of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1970  (Tamil Nadu Act 17 
of 1970). 
167. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1971 (Tamil 
Nadu Act 41 of 1971). 
168.  The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil 
Nadu Act 10 of 1972). 
169. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second Amendment Act, 1972 
(Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972). 
170. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Third Amendment Act, 1972 
(Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972). 
171. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Fourth Amendment Act, 1972 
(Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972). 
172. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Sixth Amendment Act, 1972 
(Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1974). 
173. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Fifth Amendment Act, 1972 
(Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1974). 
174. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1974 (Tamil 
Nadu Act 15 of 1974). 
175. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Third Amendment Act, 1974 
(Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1974). 
176. The Tamil Nadu  Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second Amendment Act, 1974 
(Tamil Nadu Act 32 of 1974). 
177. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1975 (Tamil 
Nadu Act 11 of 1975). 
178. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second Amendment Act, 1975 
(Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1975). 
179. Amendments made to the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 
(Uttar Pradesh Act I of 1951) by the Uttar Pradesh Land Laws (Amendment) Act, 1971 (Uttar Pradesh 
Act 21 of 1971) and the Uttar Pradesh Land Laws (Amendment) Act, 1974 (Uttar Pradesh Act 34 of 
1974). 
180. The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Uttar 
Pradesh Act 20 of 1976). 
181. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1972 (West Bengal Act XXVIII of 
1972). 
229 
182. The West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land Act, 1973 (West Bengal Act XXIII of 1973). 
183. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1974 (West Bengal Act XXXIII of 1974). 
184. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1975 (West Bengal Act XXIII of 1975). 
185. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1976 (West Bengal Act XII of 1976). 
186. The Delhi Land Holdings (Ceiling) Amendment Act, 1976 (Central Act 15 of 1976). 
187. The Goa, Daman and Diu Mundkars (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1975 (Goa, Daman and Diu 
Act 1 of 1976). 
188. The Pondicherry Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1973 (Pondicherry Act 9     
of 1974).] 
1
 [189. The Assam (Temporarily Settled Areas) Tenancy Act, 1971 (Assam Act XXIII of 1971). 
190. The Assam (Temporarily Settled Areas) Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1974 (Assam Act XVIII       
of 1974). 
191. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) 
(Amendment) Amending Act, 1974 (Bihar Act 13 of 1975). 
192. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) 
(Amendment) Act, 1976 (Bihar Act 22 of 1976). 
193. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) 
(Amendment) Act, 1978 (Bihar Act VII of 1978). 
194. The Land Acquisition (Bihar Amendment) Act, 1979 (Bihar Act 2 of 1980). 
195. The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1977 (Haryana Act 14 of 1977). 
196. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1978 (Tamil 
Nadu Act 25 of 1978). 
197. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1979 (Tamil 
Nadu Act 11 of 1979). 
198. The Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition Laws (Amendment) Act, 1978 (Uttar Pradesh Act 15 of 
1978). 
199. The West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land (Amendment) Act, 1978 (West Bengal Act 
XXIV of 1978). 
200. The West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land (Amendment) Act, 1980 (West Bengal Act LVI 
of 1980). 
201. The Goa, Daman and Diu Agricultural Tenancy Act, 1964 (Goa, Daman and Diu Act 7 of 1964). 
202. The Goa, Daman and Diu Agricultural Tenancy (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1976 (Goa, Daman and 
Diu Act 17 of 1976).] 
2
 [203. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer Regulation, 1959 (Andhra Pradesh 
Regulation 1 of 1959). 
204. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Laws (Extension and Amendment) Regulation, 1963 
(Andhra Pradesh Regulation 2 of 1963). 
205. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer (Amendment) Regulation, 1970 (Andhra 
Pradesh Regulation 1 of 1970). 
1. Entries 189 to 202 ins. by the Constitution (Forty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26-8-1984).  
2. Entries 203 to 257 ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-6-1990).  
230 
206. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer (Amendment) Regulation, 1971 (Andhra 
Pradesh Regulation 1 of 1971). 
207. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer (Amendment) Regulation, 1978 (Andhra 
Pradesh Regulation 1 of 1978). 
208. The Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 (Bihar Act 8 of 1885). 
209. The Chota Nagpur Tenancy Act, 1908 (Bengal Act 6 of 1908) (Chapter VIII—sections 46, 47, 
48, 48A and 49; Chapter X—sections 71, 71A and 71B; and Chapter XVIII—sections 240, 241 and 242). 
210. The Santhal Parganas Tenancy (Supplementary Provisions) Act, 1949 (Bihar Act 14 of 1949) 
except section 53. 
211. The Bihar Scheduled Areas Regulation, 1969 (Bihar Regulation 1 of 1969). 
212. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) 
(Amendment) Act, 1982 (Bihar Act 55 of 1982). 
213. The Gujarat Devasthan Inams Abolition Act, 1969 (Gujarat Act 16 of 1969). 
214. The Gujarat Tenancy Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Gujarat Act 37 of 1976). 
215. The Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling (Amendment) Act, 1976 (President's Act 43 of 1976). 
216. The Gujarat Devasthan Inams Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1977 (Gujarat Act 27 of 1977). 
217. The Gujarat Tenancy Laws (Amendment) Act, 1977 (Gujarat Act 30 of 1977). 
218. The Bombay Land Revenue (Gujarat Second Amendment) Act, 1980 (Gujarat Act 37 of 1980). 
219. The Bombay Land Revenue Code and Land Tenure Abolition Laws (Gujarat Amendment) Act, 
1982 (Gujarat Act 8 of 1982). 
220. The Himachal Pradesh Transfer of Land (Regulation) Act, 1968 (Himachal Pradesh Act 15 of 
1969). 
221. The Himachal Pradesh Transfer of Land (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1986 (Himachal 
Pradesh Act 16 of 1986). 
222. The Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer of Certain 
Lands) Act, 1978 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1979). 
223. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1978 (Kerala Act 13 of 1978). 
224. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981 (Kerala Act 19 of 1981). 
225. The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code (Third Amendment) Act, 1976 (Madhya Pradesh Act 
61 of 1976). 
226. The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code (Amendment) Act, 1980 (Madhya Pradesh Act 15 of 
1980). 
227. The Madhya Pradesh Akrishik Jot Uchchatam Seema Adhiniyam, 1981 (Madhya Pradesh Act 11 
of 1981). 
228. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Second Amendment) Act, 1976 
(Madhya Pradesh Act 1 of 1984). 
229. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1984 (Madhya 
Pradesh Act 14 of 1984). 
230. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Madhya 
Pradesh Act 8 of 1989). 
231 
231. The Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966 (Maharashtra Act 41 of 1966), sections 36, 36A and 
36B. 
232. The  Maharashtra  Land  Revenue  Code  and  the Maharashtra Restoration of Lands to 
Scheduled Tribes (Second Amendment) Act, 1976 (Maharashtra Act 30 of 1977). 
233. The Maharashtra Abolition of Subsisting Proprietary Rights to Mines and Minerals in certain 
Lands Act, 1985 (Maharashtra Act 16 of 1985). 
234. The Orissa Scheduled Areas Transfer of Immovable Property (by Scheduled Tribes) Regulation, 
1956 (Orissa Regulation 2 of 1956). 
235. The Orissa Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa Act 29 of 1976). 
236. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Orissa Act 30 of 1976). 
237. The Orissa Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976 (Orissa Act 44 of 1976). 
238. The Rajasthan Colonisation (Amendment) Act, 1984 (Rajasthan Act 12 of 1984). 
239. The Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1984 (Rajasthan Act 13 of 1984). 
240. The Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1987 (Rajasthan Act 21 of 1987). 
241. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second Amendment Act, 1979 
(Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1980). 
242. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1980 (Tamil 
Nadu Act 21 of 1980). 
243. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1981 (Tamil 
Nadu Act 59 of 1981). 
244. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second Amendment Act, 1983 
(Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1984). 
245. The Uttar Pradesh Land Laws (Amendment) Act, 1982 (Uttar Pradesh Act 20 of 1982). 
246. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1965 (West Bengal Act 18 of 1965). 
247. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1966 (West Bengal Act 11 of 1966). 
248. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1969 (West Bengal Act 23 of 1969). 
249. The West Bengal Estate Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1977 (West Bengal Act 36 of 1977). 
250. The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue Act, 1979 (West Bengal Act 44 of 1979). 
251. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1980 (West Bengal Act 41 of 1980). 
252. The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1981 (West Bengal Act 33                
of 1981). 
253. The Calcutta Thikka Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act, 1981 (West Bengal Act 37           
of 1981). 
254. The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1982 (West Bengal Act 23             
of 1982). 
255. The Calcutta Thikka Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1984 (West 
Bengal Act 41 of 1984). 
256. The Mahe Land Reforms Act, 1968 (Pondicherry Act 1 of 1968). 
257. The Mahe Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1980 (Pondicherry Act 1 of 1981).] 
232 
1
 [257A. The Tamil Nadu Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of 
Seats in Educational Institutions and of appointments or posts in the Services under the State) Act, 1993 
(Tamil Nadu Act 45 of 1994).] 
2
 [258. The Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead Tenancy Act, 1947 (Bihar Act 4 of 1948). 
259. The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation Act, 1956 (Bihar Act 22 
of 1956). 
260. The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation (Amendment) Act, 1970 
(Bihar Act 7 of 1970). 
261. The Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1970 (Bihar Act 9            
of 1970). 
262. The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation (Amendment) Act, 1973 
(Bihar Act 27 of 1975). 
263. The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation (Amendment) Act, 1981 
(Bihar Act 35 of 1982). 
264. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) 
(Amendment) Act, 1987 (Bihar Act 21 of 1987). 
265. The Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Bihar Act 11 of 
1989). 
266. The Bihar Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Bihar Act 11 of 1990). 
267. The Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer of Certain Lands) 
(Amendment) Act, 1984 (Karnataka Act 3 of 1984). 
268. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Kerala Act 16 of 1989). 
269. The Kerala Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1989 (Kerala Act 2 of 1990). 
270. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Orissa Act 9 of 1990). 
271. The Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1979 (Rajasthan Act 16 of 1979). 
272. The Rajasthan Colonisation (Amendment) Act, 1987 (Rajasthan Act 2 of 1987). 
273. The Rajasthan Colonisation (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Rajasthan Act 12 of 1989). 
274. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1983 (Tamil 
Nadu Act 3 of 1984). 
275. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1986 (Tamil 
Nadu Act 57 of 1986). 
276. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second Amendment Act, 1987 
(Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1988). 
277. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment (Amendment) Act, 
1989 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1989). 
278. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981 (West Bengal Act 50 of 1981). 
279. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1986 (West Bengal Act 5 of 1986). 
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-sixth Amendment) Act, 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31-8-1994).  
2. Entries 258 to 284 ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-eighth Amendment) Act, 1995, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30-8-1995).  
233 
280. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1986 (West Bengal Act 19 of 1986). 
281. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Third Amendment) Act, 1986 (West Bengal Act 35 of 1986). 
282. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1989 (West Bengal Act 23 of 1989). 
283. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1990 (West Bengal Act 24 of 1990). 
284. The West Bengal Land Reforms Tribunal Act, 1991 (West Bengal Act 12 of 1991).] 
Explanation.—Any acquisition made under the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 (Rajasthan Act III of 
1955), in contravention of the second proviso to clause (1) of article 31A shall, to the extent of the 
contravention, be void.   
234