1
 [TENTH SCHEDULE 
[Articles 102(2) and 191(2)] 
Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection 
1. Interpretation.—In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) ―House‖ means either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly or, as the case may be, 
either House of the Legislature of a State; 
(b) ‗legislature party‖, in relation to a member of a House belonging to any political party in 
accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 or2*** paragraph 4, means the group consisting of all 
the members of that House for the time being belonging to that political party in accordance with the 
said provisions; 
(c) ―original political party‖, in relation to a member of a House, means the political party to 
which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2; 
(d) ―paragraph‖ means a paragraph of this Schedule. 
2. Disqualification on ground of defection.—(1) Subject to the provisions of 3[paragraphs  4 and 5], 
a member of a House belonging to any political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the 
House— 
(a) if he has voluntarily given up his membership of such political party; or 
(b) if he votes or abstains from voting in such House contrary to any direction issued by the 
political party to which he belongs or by any person or authority authorised by it in this behalf, 
without obtaining, in either case, the prior permission of such political party, person or authority and 
such voting or abstention has not been condoned by such political party, person or authority within 
fifteen days from the date of such voting or abstention. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-paragraph,— 
(a) an elected member of a House shall be deemed to belong to the political party, if any, by 
which he was set up as a candidate for election as such member; 
(b) a nominated member of a House shall,— 
(i) where he is a member of any political party on the date of his nomination as such member, 
be deemed to belong to such political party; 
(ii) in any other case, be deemed to belong to the political party of which he becomes, or, as 
the case may be, first becomes, a member before the expiry of six months from the date on which 
he takes his seat after complying with the requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be, article 
188. 
(2) An elected member of a House who has been elected as such otherwise than as a candidate set up by 
any political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the House if he joins any political party after 
such election. 
(3) A nominated member of a House shall be disqualified for being a member of the House if he joins 
any political party after the expiry of six months from the date on which he takes his seat after complying 
with the requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be, article 188. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, a person who, 
on the commencement of the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, is a member of a House 
(whether elected or nominated as such) shall,— 
1 Added by the Constitution (Fifty-Second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 6, (w.e.f. 1-3-1985). 
2. Certain words omitted by  the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-1-2004). 
3. Subs. by ibid., for ―para 3, 4 and 5‖. 
235 
(i) where he was a member of political party immediately before such commencement, be 
deemed, for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, to have been elected as a member of 
such House as a candidate set up by such political party; 
(ii) in any other case, be deemed to be an elected member of the House who has been elected as 
such otherwise than as a candidate set up by any political party for the purposes of sub-paragraph (2) 
of this paragraph or, as the case may be, be deemed to be a nominated member of the House for the 
purposes of sub-paragraph (3) of this paragraph. 
1
 [*                         
*                           
*                           
*                           
*] 
4. Disqualification on ground of defection not to apply in case of merger.—(1) A member of a 
House shall not be disqualified under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 where his original political party 
merges with another political party and he claims that he and any other members of his original political 
party— 
(a) have become members of such other political party or, as the case may be, of a new political 
party formed by such merger; or 
(b) have not accepted the merger and opted to function as a separate group, 
and from the time of such merger, such other political party or new political party or group, as the  case 
may be, shall be deemed to be the political party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph 
(1) of paragraph 2 and to be his original political party for the purposes of this sub-paragraph. 
(2) For the purposes of  sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, the merger of the  original political party 
of a member of a House shall be deemed to have taken place if, and only if, not less than two-thirds of the 
members of the legislature party concerned have agreed to such merger. 
5. Exemption.—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule,  a person who has been 
elected to the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People or the Deputy 
Chairman of the Council  of States or the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of 
a State or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a State, shall not be 
disqualified under this Schedule,— 
(a) if he, by reason of his election to such office, voluntarily gives up the membership of the 
political party to which he belonged immediately before such election and does not, so long as he 
continues to hold such office thereafter, rejoin that political party or become a member of  another 
political party; or 
(b) if he, having given up by reason of his election to  such office his membership of the political party 
to which he belonged immediately before such  election, rejoins such political  party after he ceases to 
hold such office. 
6. Decision on questions as to disqualification on  ground of defection.—(1) If any question arises 
as to whether a member of  a House has become subject to disqualification  under this Schedule, the 
question shall be referred for the decision of the Chairman or, as the case may be, the Speaker of such 
House and his decision shall be final: 
Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the Chairman or the Speaker of a 
House has become subject to such disqualification, the question shall be referred for the decision of such 
member of the House as the House may elect in this behalf and his decision shall be final. 
(2) All proceedings under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in relation to any question as to 
disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule shall be deemed to be proceedings in 
Parliament within the meaning of article 122 or, as the case may be, proceedings in the Legislature of a 
State within the meaning of article 212. 
1. Paragraph 3 omitted by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-1-2004).  
236 
*7. Bar of jurisdiction of courts.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, no court shall have 
any jurisdiction in respect of any matter connected with the disqualification of a member of a House under 
this Schedule. 
8. Rules.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph, the Chairman or the 
Speaker of a House may make rules for giving effect to the provisions of this Schedule, and in particular, 
and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the maintenance of registers or other records as to the political parties, if any, to which 
different members of the House belong; 
(b) the report which the leader of a legislature party in relation to a member of a House shall 
furnish with regard to any condonation of the nature referred to in clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1) of 
paragraph 2 in respect of such member, the time within which and the authority to whom such report 
shall be furnished; 
(c) the reports which a political party shall furnish with regard to admission to such political party 
of any members of the House and the officer of the House to whom such reports shall be furnished; 
and 
(d) the procedure for deciding any question referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 6 
including the procedure for any inquiry which may be made for the purpose of deciding such 
question. 
(2) The rules made by the Chairman or the Speaker of a House under sub-paragraph (1) of this 
paragraph shall be laid as soon as may be after they are made before the House for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and shall take effect 
upon the expiry of the said period of thirty days unless they are sooner approved with or without 
modifications or disapproved by the House and where they are so approved, they shall take effect on such 
approval in the form in which they were laid or in such modified form, as the case may be, and where 
they are so disapproved, they shall be of no effect. 
(3) The Chairman or the Speaker of a House may, without prejudice to the provisions of article 105 
or, as the case may be, article 194, and to any other power which he may have under this Constitution 
direct that any wilful contravention by any person of the rules made under this paragraph may be dealt 
with in the same manner as a breach of privilege of the House.]  
*  Paragraph 7 declared  invalid for want of ratification in accordance with the proviso to cl. (2) of article 368 as per majority 
opinion in Kihoto Hollohon Vs. Zachilhu and others AIR 1993 SC 412. 
237 
1
 [ELEVENTH SCHEDULE 
(Article 243G) 
1. Agriculture, including agricultural extension. 
2. Land improvement, implementation of land reforms, land consolidation and soil conservation. 
3. Minor irrigation, water management and watershed development. 
4. Animal husbandry, dairying and poultry. 
5. Fisheries. 
6. Social forestry and farm forestry. 
7. Minor forest produce. 
8. Small scale industries, including food processing industries. 
9. Khadi, village and cottage industries. 
10. Rural housing. 
11. Drinking water. 
12. Fuel and fodder. 
13. Roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways and other means of communication. 
14. Rural electrification, including distribution of electricity. 
15. Non-conventional energy sources. 
16. Poverty alleviation programme. 
17. Education, including primary and secondary schools. 
18. Technical training and vocational education. 
19. Adult and non-formal education. 
20. Libraries. 
21. Cultural activities. 
22. Markets and fairs. 
23. Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health centres and dispensaries. 
24. Family welfare. 
25. Women and child development. 
26. Social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and mentally retarded. 
27. Welfare of the weaker sections, and in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes. 
28. Public distribution system. 
29. Maintenance of community assets.]  
1. Added by the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 4 (w.e.f. 24-4-1993).  
238 
1
 [TWELFTH SCHEDULE 
(Article 243W) 
1. Urban planning including town planning. 
2. Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings. 
3. Planning for economic and social development. 
4. Roads and bridges. 
5. Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes. 
6. Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management. 
7. Fire services. 
8. Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects. 
9. Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, including the handicapped and mentally 
retarded. 
10. Slum improvement and upgradation. 
11. Urban poverty alleviation. 
12. Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, playgrounds. 
13. Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects. 
14. Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds; and electric crematoriums. 
15. Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals. 
16. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths. 
17. Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public conveniences. 
18. Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.]  
1.  Added by the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-6-1993).  
239 
APPENDIX - I 
1THE CONSTITUTION (APPLICATION TO JAMMU AND KASHMIR) ORDER, 2019 
C.O. 272 
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 370 of the Constitution, the President, with 
the concurrence of the Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, is pleased to make the following 
Order:— 
1. (1) This Order may be called the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 
2019. 
(2) It shall come into force at once, and shall thereupon supersede the Constitution (Application 
to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954 as amended from time to time. 
2.  All the provisions of the Constitution, as amended from time to time, shall apply in relation to 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir and the exceptions and modifications subject to which they shall so 
apply shall be as follows:– 
To article 367, there shall be added the following clause, namely:– ―(4) For the purposes of this Constitution as it applies in relation to the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir– 
(a) references to this Constitution or to the provisions thereof shall be construed 
as references to the Constitution or the provisions thereof as applied in relation the said 
State; 
(b) references to the person for the time being recognized by the President on the 
recommendation of the Legislative Assembly of the State as the Sadar-i-Riyasat of 
Jammu and Kashmir, acting on the advice of the Council of Ministers of the State for the 
time being in office, shall be construed as references to the Governor of Jammu and 
Kashmir; 
(c) references to the Government of the said State shall be construed as including 
references to the Governor of Jammu and Kashmir acting on the advice of his Council of 
Ministers; and 
(d) in proviso to clause (3)of article 370 of this Constitution, the expression ―Constituent Assembly of the State referred to in clause (2)” shall read Legislative 
Assembly of the State‖.‖ 
1. Published with the Ministry of Law and Justice, (Legislative Department) notification No. G.S.R. 551 (E) dated the 5th August, 
2019, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (i). 
240 
APPENDIX-II 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION (FORTY-FOURTH 
AMENDMENT) ACT, 1978 
*           
*       
*                         
1. Short title and commencement.—(1)     ***                      
*          
*  
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
*        
*       
*                         
*            
3. Amendment of article 22.—In article 22 of the Constitution,—  
(a) for clause (4), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
* 
‗(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a   person for a 
longer period than two months unless an Advisory Board constituted in accordance with the 
recommendations of the Chief Justice of the appropriate High Court has reported before the expiration 
of the said period of two months that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for such detention: 
Provided that an Advisory Board shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two other 
members, and the Chairman shall be a serving Judge of the appropriate High Court and the other 
members shall be serving or retired Judges of any High Court: 
Provided further that nothing in this clause shall authorise the detention of any person beyond the 
maximum period prescribed by any law made by Parliament under sub-clause (a) of clause (7). 
Explanation.—In this clause, ―appropriate High Court‖ means,— 
(i) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention made by the 
Government of India or an officer or authority subordinate to that Government, the High Court for 
the Union territory of Delhi; 
(ii) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention made by 
the Government of any State (other than a Union territory), the High Court for that State; and 
(iii) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention made by 
the administrator of a Union territory or an officer or authority subordinate to such 
administrator, such High Court as may be specified by or under any law made by Parliament 
in this behalf.‘; 
(b) in clause (7),— 
(i) sub-clause (a) shall be omitted; 
(ii) sub-clause (b) shall be re-lettered as sub-clause (a); and  
(iii) sub-clause (c) shall be re-lettered as sub-clause (b) and in the sub-clause as so re-lettered, 
for the words, brackets, letter and figure ―sub-clause (a) of clause (4)‖,  the word, brackets and 
figure ―clause (4)‖ shall be substituted. 
*   
*   
*  
*                     
* 
241 
APPENDIX-III 
THE CONSTITUTION (EIGHTY-EIGHTH AMENDMENT)ACT,  2003  
[15th January, 2004.] 
An Act further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title and Commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Eighty-eighth 
Amendment) Act, 2003. 
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette,  appoint. 
2. Insertion of new article 268A.—After article 268 of the Constitution, the following article shall 
be inserted, namely:— ―268A. Service tax levied by Union and collected and appropriated by the Union and the 
States.—(1) Taxes on services shall be levied by the Government of India and such tax shall be 
collected and appropriated by the Government of India and the States in the manner provided in 
clause (2). 
(2) The proceeds in any financial year of any such tax levied in accordance with the provisions of 
clause (1) shall be— 
(a) collected by the Government of India and the States;  
(b) appropriated by the Government of India and the States,  
in accordance with such principles of collection and appropriation as may be formulated by 
Parliament by law.‖. 
3. Amendment of article 270.—In article 270 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words and 
figures ―articles 268 and 269‖, the words, figures and letter ―articles 268, 268A and 269‖ shall be 
substituted.  
4. Amendment of Seventh Schedule.—In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, in List I–Union 
List, after entry 92B,  the following entry shall be inserted, namely:— ―92C. Taxes on services.‖.  
Date of enforcement yet to be notified. 
242 
APPENDIX-IV 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDREDTH AMENDMENT) 
ACT, 2015 
[28th May, 2015.] 
An Act further to amend the Constitution of India to give effect to the acquiring of territories by 
India and transfer of certain territories to Bangladesh in pursuance of the agreement and its 
protocol entered into between the Governments of India and Bangladesh. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.      
2. Definitions.—In this Act,—  
(a) ―acquired territory‖ means so much of the territories comprised in the India-Bangladesh 
agreement and its protocol and referred to in the First Schedule as are demarcated for the purpose of 
being acquired by India from Bangladesh in pursuance of the agreement and its protocol referred to in 
clause (c); 
(b) ―appointed day‖ means such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint as the date for acquisition of territories from Bangladesh and transfer of the territories to 
Bangladesh in pursuance of the India-Bangladesh agreement and its protocol, after causing the 
territories to be so acquired and transferred as referred to in the First Schedule and Second Schedule and 
demarcated for the purpose; 
(c) ―India-Bangladesh agreement‖ means the agreement between the Governmentof the Republic of 
India and the Government of the People‘s Republic of Bangladesh concerning the Demarcation of the 
Land Boundary between India and Bangladeshand Related Matters dated the 16th day of May, 1974, 
Exchange of Letters dated the26th day of December, 1974, the 30th day of December, 1974, the 7th day 
of October,1982, the 26th day of March, 1992 and protocol to the said agreement dated the 6th day of 
September, 2011, entered into between the Governments of India and Bangladesh, the relevant extracts 
of which are set out in the Third Schedule; 
(d) ―transferred territory‖, means so much of the territories comprised in the India-Bangladesh 
agreement and its protocol and referred to in the Second Schedule as are demarcated for the purpose of 
being transferred by India to Bangladesh in pursuance of the agreements and its protocol referred to 
in clause (c). 
3. Amendment of First Schedule to Constitution.—As from the appointed day, in the First 
Schedule to the Constitution,— 
(a) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of  Assam, the words, brackets and 
figures ―and the territories referred to in Part I of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One 
Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015, notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of section 3 of 
the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the territories referred to in Part 
I of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015‖, shall be added 
at the end; 
(b) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of West Bengal, the words, brackets and 
figures ―and also the territories referred to in Part III of the First Schedule but excluding the territories 
referred to in Part III of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 
2015, notwithstanding anything contained in clause (c) of section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth 
Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the territories referred to in Part III of the First Schedule 
and the territories referred to in Part III of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth 
Amendment) Act, 2015‖, shall be added at the end; 
243 
(c) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Meghalaya, the words, brackets and 
figures ―and the territories referred to in Part I of the First Schedule but excluding the territories referred 
to in Part II of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015‖, 
shall be added at the end; 
(d) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Tripura, the words, brackets and figures ―and the territories referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth 
Amendment) Act, 2015, notwithstanding anything contained in clause (d) of section 3 of the 
Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the territories referred to in Part II of 
the First Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015‖, shall be added at the 
end. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sections 2(a), 2(b) and 3] 
PA R T     I 
The acquired territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated the 16th day of May, 1974 and 
Article 3 (I) (b) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) of the protocol dated the 6th day of September, 2011. 
PA RT   I I 
The acquired territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated the 16th day of May, 1974 and 
Article 3 (I) (c) (i) of the protocol dated the 6th day of September, 2011. 
PART   III 
The acquired territory in relation to Articles 1(12) and 2 of the agreement dated the 16th day of May, 
1974 and Articles 2 (II), 3 (I) (a) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) of the protocol dated the 6th day of September, 2011. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See sections 2(b), 2(d) and 3] 
PA R T    I 
The transferred territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated 16th day of May, 1974 and Article 3 
(I) (d) (i) (ii) of the protocol dated 6th day of September, 2011. 
PA RT    I I 
The transferred territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated the 16th day of May, 1974 and 
Article 3 (I) (b) (i) of the protocol dated 6th day of September, 2011. 
PART  III 
The transferred territory in relation to Articles 1(12) and 2 of the agreement dated the 16th day of May, 
1974 and Articles 2 (II), 3 (I) (a) (i) (ii) (vi) of the protocol dated the 6th day of September, 2011. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
[See section 2(c) 
I. EXTRACTS FROM THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF 
INDIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH 
CONCERNING THE DEMARCATION OF THE LAND BOUNDARY BETWEEN INDIA AND 
BANGLADESH AND RELATED MATTERS DATED THE 16TH DAY OF MAY, 1974 
Article 1 (12): ENCLAVES 
The Indian enclaves in Bangladesh and the Bangladesh enclaves in India should be exchanged 
expeditiously, excepting the enclaves mentioned in paragraph 14 without claim to compensation for the 
additional area going to Bangladesh. 
244 
Article 2: 
The Governments of India and Bangladesh agree that territories in adverse possession in areas 
already demarcated in respect of which boundary strip maps are already prepared, shall be exchanged 
within six months of the signing of the boundary strip maps by the plenipotentiaries. They may sign 
the relevant maps as early as possible as and in any case not later than the 31st December, 1974. Early 
measures may be taken to print maps in respect of other areas where demarcation has already taken 
place. These should be printed by the 31st May, 1975 and signed by the plenipotentiaries thereafter in 
order that the exchange of adversely held possessions in these areas may take place by the 31st 
December, 1975. In sectors still to be demarcated, transfer of territorial jurisdiction may take place 
within six months of the signature by plenipotentiaries on the concerned boundary strip maps. 
II. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PROTOCOL TO THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE 
GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE'S 
REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH CONCERNING THE DEMARCATION OF THE LAND BOUNDARY 
BETWEEN INDIA AND BANGLADESH AND RELATED MATTERS, DATED THE 6TH DAY OF 
SEPTEMBER, 2011 
Article 2: 
(II) Article 1 Clause 12 of the 1974 Agreement shall be implemented as follows:— 
Enclaves 
111 Indian Enclaves in Bangladesh and 51 Bangladesh Enclaves in India as per the jointly verified 
cadastral enclave maps and signed at the level of DGLR&S, Bangladesh and DLR&S, West Bengal 
(India) in April, 1997, shall be exchanged without claim to compensation for the additional areas going to 
Bangladesh. 
Article 3: 
(I) Article 2 of the 1974 Agreement shall be implemented as follows:— 
The Government of India and the Government of Bangladesh agree that the boundary shall be 
drawn as a fixed boundary for territories held in Adverse Possession as determined through joint 
survey and fully depicted in the respective adversely possessed land area Index Map (APL map) 
finalised by the Land Records and Survey Departments of both the countries between December, 
2010 and August, 2011, which are fully described in clause (a) to (d) below. 
The relevant strip maps shall be printed and signed by the Plenipotentiaries and transfer of 
territorial jurisdiction shall be completed simultaneously with the exchange of enclaves. The 
demarcation of the boundary, as depicted in the above-mentioned Index Maps, shall be as 
under:— 
(a)   West Bengal Sector 
(i)   Bousmari – Madhugari (Kushtia-Nadia) area 
The boundary shall be drawn from the existing Boundary Pillar Nos. 154/5-S to 
157/1-S to follow the centre of old course of river Mathabanga, as depicted in 
consolidation map of 1962, as surveyed jointly and agreed in June, 2011. 
(ii)    
Andharkota (Kushtia-Nadia) area 
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No. 152/5-S to 
Boundary Pillar No. 153/1-S to follow the edge of existing River Mathabanga as jointly 
surveyed and agreed in June, 2011. 
(iii)   Pakuria (Kushtia-Nadia) area 
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No. 151/1-S to 
Boundary Pillar No. 152/2-S to follow the edge of River Mathabanga as jointly 
surveyed and agreed in June, 2011. 
245 
(iv) Char Mahishkundi (Kushtia-Nadia) area 
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No. 153/1-S to 
Boundary Pillar No. 153/9-S to follow the edge of River Mathabanga as jointly 
surveyed and agreed in June, 2011. 
(v) Haripal/Khutadah/Battoli/Sapameri/LNpur (Patari) (Naogaon-Malda) area 
The boundary shall be drawn as line joining from existing Boundary Pillar No. 
242/S/13, to Boundary Pillar No. 243/7-S/5 and as jointly surveyed and agreed in 
June, 2011. 
(vi)   Berubari (Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri area) 
The boundary in the area Berubari (Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri) adversely held by 
Bangladesh, and Berubari and Singhapara-Khudipara (Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri), 
adversely held by India shall be drawn as jointly demarcated during 1996-1998. 
(b)  Meghalaya Sector 
(i)     
Lobachera-Nuncherra 
The boundary from existing Boundary Pillar No. 1315/4-S to Boundary Pillar No. 
1315/15-S in Lailong - Balichera, Boundary Pillar No. 1316/1-S to Boundary Pillar No. 
1316/11-S in Lailong- Noonchera, Boundary Pillar No. 1317 to Boundary Pillar No. 
1317/13-S in Lailong- Lahiling and Boundary Pillar No. 1318/1-S to Boundary Pillar 
No. 1318/2-S in Lailong- Lobhachera shall be drawn to follow the edge of tea gardens as 
jointly surveyed and agreed in December, 2010. 
(ii) Pyrdiwah/ Padua Area 
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No. 1270/1-S as per 
jointly surveyed and mutually agreed line till Boundary Pillar No. 1271/1-T. The Parties 
agree that the Indian Nationals from Pyrdiwah village shall be allowed to draw water 
from Piyang River near point No. 6 of the agreed Map. 
(iii)   Lyngkhat Area 
(aa)  Lyngkhat-I/Kulumcherra and Lyngkhat-II/ Kulumcherra 
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No. 1264/4-S to 
Boundary Pillar No. 1265 and BP No. 1265/6-S to 1265/9-S as per jointly surveyed and 
mutually agreed line. 
(ab) Lyngkhat-III/Sonarhat 
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No. 1266/13-S 
along the nallah southwards till it meets another nallah in the east-west direction, 
thereafter it shall run along the northern edge of the nallah in east till it meets the 
existing International Boundary north of Reference Pillar Nos.1267/4-R-B and 
1267/3-R-I. 
(iv)   Dawki/Tamabil area 
The boundary shall be drawn by a straight line joining existing Boundary Pillar 
Nos. 1275/1-S to Boundary Pillar Nos. 1275/7-S. The Parties agree to fencing on ‗zero 
line‘ in this area. 
246 
(v)  Naljuri/Sreepur Area 
(aa) Naljuri I 
The boundary shall be a line from the existing Boundary Pillar No. 1277/2-S in 
southern direction up to three plots as depicted in the strip Map No. 166 till it 
meets the nallah flowing from Boundary Pillar No. 1277/5-T, thereafter it will run 
along the western edge of the nallah in the southern direction up to 2 plots on the 
Bangladesh side, thereafter it shall run eastwards till it meets a line drawn in 
southern direction from Boundary Pillar No. 1277/4-S. 
(ab) Naljuri III 
The boundary shall be drawn by a straight line from existing Boundary Pillar 
No. 1278/2-S to Boundary Pillar No. 1279/ 3-S. 
(vi)   Muktapur/ Dibir Hawor Area 
The Parties agree that the Indian Nationals shall be allowed to visit Kali Mandir and 
shall also be allowed to draw water and exercise fishing rights in the water body in the 
Muktapur / Dibir Hawor area from the bank of Muktapur side. 
(c) Tripura Sector 
(i) Chandannagar-Champarai Tea Garden area in Tripura/ Moulvi Bazar sector 
The boundary shall be drawn along Sonaraichhera river from existing Boundary 
Pillar No. 1904 to Boundary Pillar No. 1905 as surveyed jointly and agreed in July, 2011. 
(d)  Assam Sector 
(i)   Kalabari (Boroibari) area in Assam sector 
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No. 1066/24-T to 
Boundary Pillar No. 1067/16-T as surveyed jointly and agreed in August, 2011. 
(ii)    
Pallathal area in Assam sector 
The boundary shall be drawn from existing Boundary Pillar No. 1370/3-S to 
1371/ 6-S to follow the outer edge of the tea garden and from Boundary Pillar No. 
1372 to 1373/2-S along outer edge of the pan plantation.  
247 
 
248 
III. LIST OF EXCHANGE OF ENCLAVES BETWEEN INDIA AND BANGLADESH IN PURSUANT 
TO ARTICLE 1 (12) OF THE AGREEMENT DATED 16TH MAY, 1974 AND THE PROTOCOL TO THE 
AGREEMENT DATED 6TH SEPTEMBER, 2011 
A.    EXCHANGEABLE INDIAN ENCLAVES IN BANGLADESH WITH AREA 
Sl.      Name of 
Chhits No. 
Chhit No. Lying within Police station 
Bangladesh 
Lying within 
Police station 
W. Bengal 
Area in 
acres 
1 2 3 4 5       6 
A. Enclaves with independent chhits 
1. Garati 75 Pochagar Haldibari 58.23 
2. Garati 76 Pochagar Haldibari 0.79 
3. Garati 77 Pochagar Haldibari 18 
4. Garati 78 Pochagar Haldibari 958.66 
5. Garati 79 Pochagar Haldibari 1.74 
6. Garati 80 Pochagar Haldibari 73.75 
7. Bingimari Part
I 
73 Pochagar Haldibari 6.07 
8. Nazirganja 41 Boda Haldibari 58.32 
9. Nazirganja 42 Boda Haldibari 434.29 
10. Nazirganja 44 Boda Haldibari 53.47 
11. Nazirganja 45 Boda Haldibari 1.07 
12. Nazirganja 46 Boda Haldibari 17.95 
13. Nazirganja 47 Boda Haldibari 3.89 
14. Nazirganja 48 Boda Haldibari 73.27 
15. Nazirganja 49 Boda Haldibari 49.05 
16. Nazirganja 50 Boda Haldibari 5.05 
17. Nazirganja 51 Boda Haldibari 0.77 
18. Nazirganja 52 Boda Haldibari 1.04 
19. Nazirganja 53 Boda Haldibari 1.02 
20. Nazirganja 54 Boda Haldibari 3.87 
21. Nazirganja 55 Boda Haldibari 12.18 
22. Nazirganja 56 Boda Haldibari 54.04 
23. Nazirganja 57 Boda Haldibari 8.27 
24. Nazirganja 58 Boda Haldibari 14.22 
25. Nazirganja 60 Boda Haldibari 0.52 
26. Putimari 59 Boda Haldibari 122.8 
27. Daikhata Chhat 38 Boda Haldibari 499.21 
28. Salbari 37 Boda Haldibari 1188.93 
 
 
249 
1  2 3 4 5       6 
29. Kajal Dighi 36 Boda Haldibari 771.44 
30. Nataktoka 32 Boda Haldibari 162.26 
31. Nataktoka 33 Boda Haldibari 0.26 
32. Beuladanga 
Chhat 
35 Boda Haldibari 0.83 
33. Balapara 
Iagrabar 
3 Debiganj Haldibari 1752.44 
34. Bara 
Khankikharija 
Citaldaha 
30 Dimla Haldibari 7.71 
35. Bara 
Khankikharija 
Citaldaha 
29 Dimla Haldibari 36.83 
36. Barakhangir 28 Dimla Haldibari 30.53 
37. Nagarjikobari 31 Dimla Haldibari 33.41 
38. Kuchlibari 26 Patgram Mekliganj 5.78 
39. Kuchlibari 27 Patgram Mekliganj 2.04 
40. Bara Kuchlibari Fragment of 
J.L.107 of  P.S 
Mekliganj 
Patgram Mekliganj 4.35 
41. Jamaldaha
Balapukhari 
6 Patgram Mekliganj 5.24 
42. Uponchowki 
kuchlibari 
115/2 Patgram Mekliganj 0.32 
43. Uponchowki 
kuchlibari 
7 Patgram Mekliganj 44.04 
44. Bhothnri 11 Patgram Mekliganj 36.83 
45. Balapukhari 5 Patgram Mekliganj 55.91 
46. Bara Khangir 4 Patgram Mekliganj 50.51 
47. Bara Khangir 9 Patgram Mekliganj 87.42 
48. Chhat 
Bogdokra 
10 Patgram Mekliganj 41.7 
49. Ratanpur 11 Patgram Mekliganj 58.91 
50. Bogdokra 12 Patgram Mekliganj 25.49 
51. Fulker Dabri Fragment of J.L. 
107 of P.S 
Mekliganj 
 
 
Patgram Mekliganj 0.88 
 
250 
 
1 2 3 4 5       6 
52. Kharkharia 15 Patgram Mekliganj 60.74 
53. Kharkharia 13 Patgram Mekliganj 51.62 
54. Lotamari 14 Patgram Mekliganj 110.92 
55. Bhotbari 16 Patgram Mekliganj 205.46 
56. Komat 
Changrabandha 
16A Patgram Mekliganj 42.8 
57. Komat 
Changrabandha 
17A Patgram Mekliganj 16.01 
58. Panisala 17 Patgram Mekliganj 137.66 
59. Dwarikamari 
Khasbash 
18 Patgram Mekliganj 36.5 
60. Panisala 153/P Patgram Mekliganj 0.27 
61. Panisala 153/0 Patgram Mekliganj 18.01 
62. Panisala 19 Patgram Mekliganj 64.63 
63. Panisala 21 Patgram Mekliganj 51.4 
64. Lotamari 20 Patgram Mekliganj 283.53 
65. Lotamari 22 Patgram Mekliganj 98.85 
66. Dwarikamari 23 Patgram Mekliganj 39.52 
67. Dwarikamari 25 Patgram Mekliganj 45.73 
68. Chhat Bhothat 24 Patgram Mekliganj 56.11 
69. Baakata 131 Patgram Hathabhanga 22.35 
70. Baakata 132 Patgram Hathabhanga 11.96 
71. Baakata 130 Patgram Hathibhanga 20.48 
72. Bhogramguri 133 Patgram Hathibhanga 1.44 
73. Chenakata 134 Patgram Mekliganj 7.81 
74. Banskata 119 Patgram Mathabanga 413.81 
75. Banskata 120 Patgram Mathabanga 30.75 
76. Banskata 121 Patgram Mathabanga 12.15 
77. Banskata 113 Patgram Mathabanga 57.86 
78. Banskata 112 Patgram Mathabanga 315.04 
79. Banskata 114 Patgram Mathabanga 0.77 
80. Banskata 115 Patgram Mathabanga 29.2 
81. Banskata 122 Patgram Mathabanga 33.22 
 
 
251 
 
 
1 2 3 4 5       6 
82. Banskata 127 Patgram Mathabanga 12.72 
83. Banskata 128 Patgram Mathabanga 2.33 
84. Banskata 117 Patgram Mathabanga 2.55 
85. Banskata 118 Patgram Mathabanga 30.98 
86. Banskata 125 Patgram Mathabanga 0.64 
87. Banskata 126 Patgram Mathabanga 1.39 
88. Banskata 129 Patgram Mathabanga 1.37 
89. Banskata 116 Patgram Mathabanga 16.96 
90. Banskata 123 Patgram Mathabanga 24.37 
91. Banskata 124 Patgram Mathabanga 0.28 
92. Gotamari Chhit 135 Hatibandha Sitalkuchi 126.59 
93. Gotamari Chhit 136 Hatibandha Sitalkuchi 20.02 
94. Banapachai 151 Lalmonirhat Dinhata 217.29 
95. Banapachai 
Bhitarkuthi 
152 Lalmonirhat Dinhata 81.71 
96. Dasiar Chhara 150 Fulbari Dinhata 1643.44 
97. Dakurhat- 
Dakinirkuthi 
156 Kurigram Dinhata 14.27 
98. Kalamati 141 Bhurungamari Dinhata 21.21 
99. Bhahobganj 153 Bhurungamari Dinhata 31.58 
100. Baotikursa 142 Bhurungamari Dinhata 45.63 
101. Bara 
Coachulka 
143 Bhurungamari Dinhata 39.99 
102. Gaochulka II 147 Bhurungamari Dinhata 0.9 
103. Gaochulka I 146 Bhurungamari Dinhata 8.92 
104. Dighaltari II 145 Bhurungamari Dinhata 8.81 
105. Dighaltari I 144 Bhurungamari Dinhata 12.31 
106. Chhoto 
Garaljhora II 
149 Bhurungamari Dinhata 17.85 
107. Chhoto 
Garaljhora I 
            148 Bhurungamari Dinhata 35.74 
108. 1 chhit without 
name & JL No. 
at the southern 
and of JL No. 38 
& southern and 
of JL No. 39 
(locally known 
as 
Ashokabari*) 
 Patgram Mathabhanga 3.5 
                                                           
Corrected vide 150th (54th) India-Bangladesh Boundary Conference held at Kolkata from 29th September to 2nd October, 2002. 
*Corrected vide 152nd (56th) India-Bangladesh Boundary Conference held at Kochbihar, India from 18th-20th September, 2003. 
 
 
252 
1 2 3 4 5       6 
Enclaves with Fragmented Chhits 
109. (i) 
Bewladanga 
34 Haldibari Boda 862.46 
 (ii) 
Bewladanga 
Fragment Haldibari Debiganj  
110. (i) 
Kotbhajni 
2 Haldibari Debiganj 2012.27 
 (ii) 
Kotbhajni 
Fragment Haldibari Debiganj  
 (iii) 
Kotbhajni 
Fragment Haldibari Debiganj  
 (iv) 
Kotbhajni 
Fragment Haldibari Debiganj  
111. (i) Dahala Khagrabri Haldibari Debiganj 2650.35 
 (ii) Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj  
 (iii) Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj  
 (iv) Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj  
 (v) Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj  
 (vi) Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj  
    17160.63 
The above given details of enclaves have been jointly compared and reconciled with            
records held by India and Bangladesh during the Indo-Bangladesh Conference held at Calcutta 
during 9th — 12th October, 1996 as well as during joint field inspection at Jalpaiguri (West Bengal) 
Panchagarh (Bangladesh) sector during 21—24 November, 1996. 
Note: Name of enclave in Sl. No. 108 above has been identified as Ashokabari by joint ground 
verification during field season 1996-97. 
 
Brig. J.R. Peter 
Director Land Records & Survey               
(Ex-Officio) West Bengal, India                     
& Director, Eastern Circle Survey                
of India, Calcutta. 
Md. Shafi Uddin 
Director General, Land Records 
and Surveys, Bangladesh. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
 
 
B. EXCHANGEABLE BANGLADESH ENCLAVES IN INDIA WITH AREA 
Sl. No.     Name of Chhits  Lying  
within  
Police station 
W. Bengal 
Lying  
within  
Police station 
Bangladesh 
          J.L.  
          No. 
       Area in acres 
1 2       3 4               5                             6 
A. Enclaves with independent chits 
1. Chhit  
Kuchlibari 
Mekliganj Patgram 22 370.64 
2. Chhit Land of 
Kuchlibari 
Mekliganj Patgram 24 1.83 
3. Balapukhari Mekliganj Patgram 21 331.64 
4. Chhit Land of 
Panbari No. 2 
Mekliganj Patgram 20 1.13 
5. Chhit Panbari Mekliganj Patgram 18 108.59 
6. Dhabalsati 
Mirgipur 
Mekliganj Patgram 15 173.88 
7. Bamandal Mekliganj Patgram 11 2.24 
8. Chhit  
Dhabalsati 
Mekliganj Patgram 14 66.58 
9. Dhabalsati Mekliganj Patgram 13 60.45 
10. Srirampur Mekliganj Patgram 8 1.05 
11. Jote Nijjama Mekliganj Patgram 3 87.54 
12. Chhit Land of 
Jagatber No.3 
Mathabhanga Patgram 37 69.84 
13. Chhit Land of 
Jagatber No.1 
Mathabhanga Patgram 35 30.66 
14. Chhit Land of 
Jagatber No.2 
Mathabhanga Patgram 36 27.09 
15. Chhit  
Kokoabari 
Mathabhanga Patgram 47 29.49 
16. Chhit  
Bhandardaha 
Mathabhanga Patgram 67 39.96 
17. Dhabalguri Mathabhanga Patgram 52 12.5 
18. Chhit  
Dhabalguri 
Mathabhanga Patgram 53 22.31 
19. Chhit Land of 
Dhabalguri  
No. 3 
Mathabhanga Patgram 70 1.33 
 
254 
1 2 3       4 5       6 
 
20. 
 
Chhit Land of 
Dhabalguri  
No.4 
 
Mathabhanga 
 
Patgram 
 
71 
 
4.55 
21. Chhit Land of 
Dhabalguri  
No.5 
Mathabhanga Patgram 72 4.12 
22. Chhit Land of 
Dhabalguri  
No.1 
Mathabhanga Patgram 68 26.83 
23. Chhit Land of 
Dhabalguri  
No.2 
Mathabhanga Patgram 69 13.95 
24. Mahishmari Sitalkuchi Patgram 54 122.77 
25. Bura Saradubi Sitalkuchi Hatibadha 13 34.96 
26. Falnapur Sitalkuchi Patgram 64 505.56 
27. Amjhol Sitalkuchi Hatibandha 57 1.25 
28. Kismat Batrigachh Dinhata Kaliganj 82 209.95 
29. Durgapur Dinhata Kaliganj 83 20.96 
30. Bansua Khamar 
Gitaldaha 
Dinhata Lalmonirhat 1 24.54 
31. Poaturkuthi Dinhata Lalmonirhat 37 589.94 
32. Paschim Bakalir 
Chhara 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 38 151.98 
33. Madhya Bakalir 
Chhara 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 39 32.72 
34. Purba Bakalir 
Chhara 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 40 12.23 
35. Madhya 
Masaldanga 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 3 136.66 
36. Madhya Chhit 
Masaldanga 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 8 11.87 
37. Paschim Chhit 
Masaldanga 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 7 7.6 
38. Uttar  
Masaldanga 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 2 27.29 
39. Kachua Dinhata Bhurungamari 5 119.74 
 
 
 
255 
1 2 3 4     5       6 
40. Uttar  
Bansjani 
Tufanganj Bhurungamari     1 47.17 
41. Chhat Tilai Tufanganj Bhurungamari    17 81.56 
B. Enclaves with Fragmented Chhits 
42. (i) Nalgram Sitalkuchi Patgarm 65 1397.34 
 (ii) Nalgram 
(Fragment) 
Sitalkuchi Patgarm 65  
 (iii) Nalgram 
(Fragment) 
Sitalkuchi Patgarm 65  
43. (i) Chhit  
Nalgram 
Sitalkuchi Patgarm 66 49.5 
 (ii) Chhit  
Nalgram  
(Fragment) 
Sitalkuchi Patgarm 66  
44. (i) Batrigachh Dinhata Kaliganj 81 577.37 
 (ii) Batrigachh 
(Fragment) 
Dinhata Kaliganj 81  
 (iii) Batrigachh 
(Fragment) 
Dinhata Phulbari 9  
45. (i) Karala Dinhata Phulbari 9 269.91 
 (ii) Karala 
(fragment) 
Dinhata Phulbari 9  
 (iii) Karala 
(fragment) 
Dinhata Phulbari 8  
46. (i) Sipprasad 
Mustati 
Dinhata Phulbari 8 373.2 
 (ii) Sipprasad 
Mustati  
(Fragment) 
Dinhata Phulbari 6  
47. (i) Dakshin 
Masaldanga 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 6 571.38 
 (ii) Dakshin 
Masaldanga 
(Fragment) 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 6  
 (iii) Dakshin 
Masaldanga 
(Fragment) 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 6  
 (iv) Dakshin 
Masaldanga 
(Fragment) 
 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 6  
 
256 
1  2 3 4 5 6 
 (v) Dakshin 
Masaldanga 
(Fragment) 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 6  
 (vi) Dakshin 
Masaldanga 
(Fragment) 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 6  
48. (i) Paschim 
Masaldanga 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 4 29.49 
 (ii) Paschim 
Masaldanga 
(Fragment) 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 4  
49. (i) Purba Chhit 
Masaldanga 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 10 35.01 
 (ii) Purba Chhit 
Masaldanga 
(Fragment) 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 10  
50. (i) Purba 
Masaldanga 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 11 153.89 
 (ii) Purba 
Masaldanga 
(Fragment) 
Dinhata Bhurungamari 11  
51. (i) Uttar Dhaldanga Tufanganj Bhurungamari 14 24.98 
 (ii) Uttar Dhaldanga 
(Fragment) 
Tufanganj Bhurungamari 14  
 (iii) Uttar Dhaldanga 
(Fragment) 
Tufanganj Bhurungamari 14  
 Total Area    7,110.02 
 
The above given details of enclaves have been jointly compared and reconciled with records held 
by India and Bangladesh during the Indo-Bangladesh Conference held at Calcutta during 9th—12th 
October, 1996 as well as during joint field inspection at Jalpaiguri (West Bengal) – Panchagarh 
(Bangladesh) sector during 21—24 November, 1996. 
 
Brig. J.R. Peter 
Director Land Records & Survey     
(Ex officio) West Bengal, India 
&Director, Eastern Circle Survey of 
India, Calcutta. 
Md. Shafi Uddin 
Director General, Land Records 
and Surveys, Bangladesh. 
