
97. Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years of age with intent to steal from its person.—
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any child under the age of ten years with the intention of taking dishonestly
any movable property from the person of such child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
98. Selling child for purposes of prostitution, etc.—Whoever sells, lets to hire, or otherwise
disposes of any child with intent that such child shall at any age be employed or used for the purpose of
prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it
to be likely that such child will at any age be employed or used for any such purpose, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
Explanation 1.—When a female under the age of eighteen years is sold, let for hire, or otherwise
disposed of to a prostitute or to any person who keeps or manages a brothel, the person so disposing of
such female shall, until the contrary is proved, be presumed to have disposed of her with the intent that
she shall be used for the purpose of prostitution.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section “illicit intercourse” means sexual intercourse
between persons not united by marriage or by any union or tie which, though not amounting to a
marriage, is recognised by the personal law or custom of the community to which they belong or, where
they belong to different communities, of both such communities, as constituting between them a
quasi-marital relation.
99. Buying child for purposes of prostitution, etc.—Whoever buys, hires or otherwise obtains
possession of any child with intent that such child shall at any age be employed or used for the purpose of
prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it
to be likely that such child will at any age be employed or used for any such purpose, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which
may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation 1.—Any prostitute or any person keeping or managing a brothel, who buys, hires or
otherwise obtains possession of a female under the age of eighteen years shall, until the contrary is
proved, be presumed to have obtained possession of such female with the intent that she shall be used for
the purpose of prostitution.
Explanation 2.— “Illicit intercourse” has the same meaning as in section 98.
CHAPTER VI
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY
Of offences affecting life
100. Culpable homicide.—Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing
death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the
knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide.
Illustrations.
(a) A lays sticks and turf over a pit, with the intention of thereby causing death, or with the
knowledge that death is likely to be thereby caused. Z, believing the ground to be firm, treads on it, falls
in and is killed. A has committed the offence of culpable homicide.
(b) A knows Z to be behind a bush. B does not know it. A, intending to cause, or knowing it to be
likely to cause Z’s death, induces B to fire at the bush. B fires and kills Z. Here B may be guilty of no
offence; but A has committed the offence of culpable homicide.
(c) A, by shooting at a fowl with intent to kill and steal it, kills B, who is behind a bush; A not
knowing that he was there. Here, although A was doing an unlawful act, he was not guilty of culpable
43
homicide, as he did not intend to kill B, or to cause death by doing an act that he knew was likely to cause
death.
Explanation 1.—A person who causes bodily injury to another who is labouring under a disorder,
disease or bodily infirmity, and thereby accelerates the death of that other, shall be deemed to have
caused his death.
Explanation 2.—Where death is caused by bodily injury, the person who causes such bodily injury
shall be deemed to have caused the death, although by resorting to proper remedies and skilful treatment
the death might have been prevented.
Explanation 3.—The causing of the death of a child in the mother’s womb is not homicide. But it
may amount to culpable homicide to cause the death of a living child, if any part of that child has been
brought forth, though the child may not have breathed or been completely born.
101. Murder.—Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder,—
(a) if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death; or
(b) if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury
as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused; or
(c) if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to
any person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature
to cause death; or
(d) if the person committing the act by which the death is caused, knows that it is so imminently
dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death, or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death,
and commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury as
aforesaid.
Illustrations.
(a) A shoots Z with the intention of killing him. Z dies in consequence. A commits murder.
(b) A, knowing that Z is labouring under such a disease that a blow is likely to cause his death, strikes
him with the intention of causing bodily injury. Z dies in consequence of the blow. A is guilty of murder,
although the blow might not have been sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause the death of a
person in a sound state of health. But if A, not knowing that Z is labouring under any disease, gives him
such a blow as would not in the ordinary course of nature kill a person in a sound state of health, here A,
although he may intend to cause bodily injury, is not guilty of murder, if he did not intend to cause death,
or such bodily injury as in the ordinary course of nature would cause death.
(c) A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or club-wound sufficient to cause the death of a man in the
ordinary course of nature. Z dies in consequence. Here A is guilty of murder, although he may not have
intended to cause Z’s death.
(d) A without any excuse fires a loaded cannon into a crowd of persons and kills one of them. A is
guilty of murder, although he may not have had a premeditated design to kill any particular individual.
Exception 1.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, whilst deprived of the power of
self-control by grave and sudden provocation, causes the death of the person who gave the provocation or
causes the death of any other person by mistake or accident:
Provided that the provocation is not,—
(a) sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender as an excuse for killing or doing harm to any
person;
(b) given by anything done in obedience to the law, or by a public servant in the lawful exercise
of the powers of such public servant;
(c) given by anything done in the lawful exercise of the right of private defence.
44
Explanation.—Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to prevent the offence
from amounting to murder is a question of fact.
Illustrations.
(a) A, under the influence of passion excited by a provocation given by Z, intentionally kills Y,
Z’s child. This is murder, in as much as the provocation was not given by the child, and the death of
the child was not caused by accident or misfortune in doing an act caused by the provocation.
(b) Y gives grave and sudden provocation to A. A, on this provocation, fires a pistol at Y, neither
intending nor knowing himself to be likely to kill Z, who is near him, but out of sight. A kills Z. Here
A has not committed murder, but merely culpable homicide.
(c) A is lawfully arrested by Z, a bailiff. A is excited to sudden and violent passion by the arrest,
and kills Z. This is murder, in as much as the provocation was given by a thing done by a public
servant in the exercise of his powers.
(d) A appears as a witness before Z, a Magistrate. Z says that he does not believe a word of A’s
deposition, and that A has perjured himself. A is moved to sudden passion by these words, and kills Z.
This is murder.
(e) A attempts to pull Z’s nose. Z, in the exercise of the right of private defence, lays hold of A to
prevent him from doing so. A is moved to sudden and violent passion in consequence, and kills Z.
This is murder, in as much as the provocation was giving by a thing done in the exercise of the right of
private defence.
(f) Z strikes B. B is by this provocation excited to violent rage. A, a bystander, intending to take
advantage of B’s rage, and to cause him to kill Z, puts a knife into B’s hand for that purpose. B kills Z
with the knife. Here B may have committed only culpable homicide, but A is guilty of murder.
Exception 2.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender in the exercise in good faith of the
right of private defence of person or property, exceeds the power given to him by law and causes the
death of the person against whom he is exercising such right of defence without premeditation, and
without any intention of doing more harm than is necessary for the purpose of such defence.
Illustration.
Z attempts to horsewhip A, not in such a manner as to cause grievous hurt to A. A draws out a pistol.
Z persists in the assault. A believing in good faith that he can by no other means prevent himself from
being horsewhipped, shoots Z dead. A has not committed murder, but only culpable homicide.
Exception 3.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, being a public servant or aiding a
public servant acting for the advancement of public justice, exceeds the powers given to him by law, and
causes death by doing an act which he, in good faith, believes to be lawful and necessary for the due
discharge of his duty as such public servant and without ill-will towards the person whose death is
caused.
Exception 4.—Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without premeditation in a sudden
fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the offender’s having taken undue
advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner.
Explanation.—It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the provocation or commits the first
assault.
Exception 5.—Culpable homicide is not murder when the person whose death is caused, being above
the age of eighteen years, suffers death or takes the risk of death with his own consent.
Illustration.
A, by instigation, voluntarily causes Z, a child to commit suicide. Here, on account of Z’s youth, he
was incapable of giving consent to his own death; A has therefore abetted murder.
102. Culpable homicide by causing death of person other than person whose death was
intended.—If a person, by doing anything which he intends or knows to be likely to cause death,
45
commits culpable homicide by causing the death of any person, whose death he neither intends nor
knows himself to be likely to cause, the culpable homicide committed by the offender is of the
description of which it would have been if he had caused the death of the person whose death he intended
or knew himself to be likely to cause.
103. Punishment for murder.—(1) Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) When a group of five or more persons acting in concert commits murder on the ground of race,
caste or community, sex, place of birth, language, personal belief or any other similar ground each
member of such group shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable
to fine.
104. Punishment for murder by life-convict.—Whoever, being under sentence of imprisonment for
life, commits murder, shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, which shall mean the
remainder of that person’s natural life.
105. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.—Whoever commits culpable
homicide not amounting to murder, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of
either description for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of
causing death, or of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death; or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years and with fine, if the act is done with the knowledge
that it is likely to cause death, but without any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as
is likely to cause death.
106. Causing death by negligence.—(1) Whoever causes death of any person by doing any rash or
negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if such act is
done by a registered medical practitioner while performing medical procedure, he shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “registered medical practitioner” means a
medical practitioner who possesses any medical qualification recognised under the National Medical
Commission Act, 2019 (30 of 2019) and whose name has been entered in the National Medical Register
or a State Medical Register under that Act.
(2) Whoever causes death of any person by rash and negligent driving of vehicle not amounting to
culpable homicide, and escapes without reporting it to a police officer or a Magistrate soon after the
incident, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description of a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
107. Abetment of suicide of child or person of unsound mind.—If any child, any person of
unsound mind, any delirious person or any person in a state of intoxication, commits suicide, whoever
abets the commission of such suicide, shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
108. Abetment of suicide.—If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such
suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
109. Attempt to murder.—(1) Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, and under
such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine; and if hurt is caused to any person by such act, the offender shall be liable either to imprisonment
for life, or to such punishment as is hereinbefore mentioned.
46
(2) When any person offending under sub-section (1) is under sentence of imprisonment for life, he
may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death or with imprisonment for life, which shall mean the
remainder of that person’s natural life.
Illustrations.
(a) A shoots at Z with intention to kill him, under such circumstances that, if death ensued, A would
be guilty of murder. A is liable to punishment under this section.
(b) A, with the intention of causing the death of a child of tender years, exposes it in a desert place. A
has committed the offence defined by this section, though the death of the child does not ensue.
(c) A, intending to murder Z, buys a gun and loads it. A has not yet committed the offence. A fires
the gun at Z. He has committed the offence defined in this section, and, if by such firing he wounds Z, he
is liable to the punishment provided by the latter part of sub-section (1).
(d) A, intending to murder Z by poison, purchases poison and mixes the same with food which
remains in A’s keeping; A has not yet committed the offence defined in this section. A places the food on
Z’s table or delivers it to Z’s servants to place it on Z’s table. A has committed the offence defined in this
section.
110. Attempt to commit culpable homicide.—Whoever does any act with such intention or
knowledge and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of
culpable homicide not amounting to murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and, if hurt is caused to any person
by such act, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration
A, on grave and sudden provocation, fires a pistol at Z, under such circumstances that if he thereby
caused death, he would be guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. A has committed the
offence defined in this section.
111. Organised crime.—(1) Any continuing unlawful activity including kidnapping, robbery,
vehicle theft, extortion, land grabbing, contract killing, economic offence, cyber-crimes, trafficking of
persons, drugs, weapons or illicit goods or services, human trafficking for prostitution or ransom, by any
person or a group of persons acting in concert, singly or jointly, either as a member of an organised crime
syndicate or on behalf of such syndicate, by use of violence, threat of violence, intimidation, coercion, or
by any other unlawful means to obtain direct or indirect material benefit including a financial benefit,
shall constitute organised crime.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(i) “organised crime syndicate” means a group of two or more persons who, acting either singly
or jointly, as a syndicate or gang indulge in any continuing unlawful activity;
(ii) “continuing unlawful activity” means an activity prohibited by law which is a cognizable
offence punishable with imprisonment of three years or more, undertaken by any person, either singly
or jointly, as a member of an organised crime syndicate or on behalf of such syndicate in respect of
which more than one charge-sheets have been filed before a competent Court within the preceding
period of ten years and that Court has taken cognizance of such offence, and includes economic
offence;
(iii) “economic offence” includes criminal breach of trust, forgery, counterfeiting of currencynotes, bank-notes and Government stamps, hawala transaction, mass-marketing fraud or running any
scheme to defraud several persons or doing any act in any manner with a view to defraud any bank or
financial institution or any other institution or organisation for obtaining monetary benefits in any
form.
(2) Whoever commits organised crime shall,—
47
(a) if such offence has resulted in the death of any person, be punished with death or
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees;
(b) in any other case, be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five
years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not
be less than five lakh rupees.
(3) Whoever abets, attempts, conspires or knowingly facilitates the commission of an organised
crime, or otherwise engages in any act preparatory to an organised crime, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees.
(4) Any person who is a member of an organised crime syndicate shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees.
(5) Whoever, intentionally, harbours or conceals any person who has committed the offence of an
organised crime shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years
but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than
five lakh rupees:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to any case in which the harbour or concealment is by
the spouse of the offender.
(6) Whoever possesses any property derived or obtained from the commission of an organised crime
or proceeds of any organised crime or which has been acquired through the organised crime, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than two lakh rupees.
(7) If any person on behalf of a member of an organised crime syndicate is, or at any time has been in
possession of movable or immovable property which he cannot satisfactorily account for, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to
imprisonment for ten years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
112. Petty organised crime.—(1) Whoever, being a member of a group or gang, either singly or
jointly, commits any act of theft, snatching, cheating, unauthorised selling of tickets, unauthorised betting
or gambling, selling of public examination question papers or any other similar criminal act, is said to
commit petty organised crime.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section “theft” includes trick theft, theft from vehicle,
dwelling house or business premises, cargo theft, pick pocketing, theft through card skimming,
shoplifting and theft of Automated Teller Machine.
(2) Whoever commits any petty organised crime shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
113. Terrorist act.—(1) Whoever does any act with the intent to threaten or likely to threaten the
unity, integrity, sovereignty, security, or economic security of India or with the intent to strike terror or
likely to strike terror in the people or any section of the people in India or in any foreign country,—
(a) by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substance or inflammable substance or firearms
or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious gases or other chemicals or by any other substance
(whether biological, radioactive, nuclear or otherwise) of a hazardous nature or by any other means
of whatever nature to cause or likely to cause,—
(i) death of, or injury to, any person or persons; or
(ii) loss of, or damage to, or destruction of, property; or
(iii) disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the community in India or in
any foreign country; or
48
(iv) damage to, the monetary stability of India by way of production or smuggling or
circulation of counterfeit Indian paper currency, coin or of any other material; or
(v) damage or destruction of any property in India or in a foreign country used or intended to
be used for the defence of India or in connection with any other purposes of the Government of
India, any State Government or any of their agencies; or
(b) overawes by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force or attempts to do so or
causes death of any public functionary or attempts to cause death of any public functionary; or
(c) detains, kidnaps or abducts any person and threatening to kill or injure such person or does
any other act in order to compel the Government of India, any State Government or the Government
of a foreign country or an international or inter-governmental organisation or any other person to do
or abstain from doing any act,
commit a terrorist act.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section,—
(a) “public functionary” means the constitutional authorities or any other functionary notified in
the Official Gazette by the Central Government as public functionary;
(b) “counterfeit Indian currency” means the counterfeit currency as may be declared after
examination by an authorised or notified forensic authority that such currency imitates or
compromises with the key security features of Indian currency.
(2) Whoever commits a terrorist act shall,—
(a) if such offence has resulted in the death of any person, be punished with death or
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) in any other case, be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five
years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or advocates, abets, advises or incites, directly or
knowingly facilitates the commission of a terrorist act or any act preparatory to the commission of a
terrorist act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but
which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever organises or causes to be organised any camp or camps for imparting training in terrorist
act, or recruits or causes to be recruited any person or persons for commission of a terrorist act, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Any person who is a member of an organisation which is involved in terrorist act, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(6) Whoever voluntarily harbours or conceals, or attempts to harbour or conceal any person knowing
that such person has committed a terrorist act shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than three years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to
fine:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to any case in which the harbour or concealment is by
the spouse of the offender.
(7) Whoever knowingly possesses any property derived or obtained from commission of any terrorist
act or acquired through the commission of any terrorist act shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the officer not below the rank of
Superintendent of Police shall decide whether to register the case under this section or under the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967).
49
Of hurt
114. Hurt.—Whoever causes bodily pain, disease or infirmity to any person is said to cause hurt.
115. Voluntarily causing hurt.—(1) Whoever does any act with the intention of thereby causing
hurt to any person, or with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any person, and does
thereby cause hurt to any person, is said “voluntarily to cause hurt”.
(2) Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub-section (1) of section 122 voluntarily causes
hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year,
or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
116. Grievous hurt.—The following kinds of hurt only are designated as “grievous”, namely:—
(a) Emasculation;
(b) Permanent privation of the sight of either eye;
(c) Permanent privation of the hearing of either ear;
(d) Privation of any member or joint;
(e) Destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of any member or joint;
(f) Permanent disfiguration of the head or face;
(g) Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth;
(h) Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the sufferer to be during the space of fifteen
days in severe bodily pain, or unable to follow his ordinary pursuits.
117. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.—(1) Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, if the hurt which he
intends to cause or knows himself to be likely to cause is grievous hurt, and if the hurt which he causes is
grievous hurt, is said “voluntarily to cause grievous hurt”.
Explanation.—A person is not said voluntarily to cause grievous hurt except when he both causes
grievous hurt and intends or knows himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt. But he is said voluntarily
to cause grievous hurt, if intending or knowing himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt of one kind, he
actually causes grievous hurt of another kind.
Illustration.
A, intending of knowing himself to be likely permanently to disfigure Z’s face, gives Z a blow which
does not permanently disfigure Z’s face, but which causes Z to suffer severe bodily pain for the space of
fifteen days. A has voluntarily caused grievous hurt.
(2) Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub-section (2) of section 122, voluntarily causes
grievous hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever commits an offence under sub-section (1) and in the course of such commission causes
any hurt to a person which causes that person to be in permanent disability or in persistent vegetative
state, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but
which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that
person’s natural life.
(4) When a group of five or more persons acting in concert, causes grievous hurt to a person on the
ground of his race, caste or community, sex, place of birth, language, personal belief or any other similar
ground, each member of such group shall be guilty of the offence of causing grievous hurt, and shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
118. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means.—(1) Whoever,
except in the case provided for by sub-section (1) of section 122, voluntarily causes hurt by means of any
instrument for shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is
50
likely to cause death, or by means of fire or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any
corrosive substance, or by means of any explosive substance, or by means of any substance which it is
deleterious to the human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any
animal, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.
(2) Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub-section (2) of section 122, voluntarily causes
grievous hurt by any means referred to in sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
119. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal
act.—(1) Whoever voluntarily causes hurt for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer, or from any
person interested in the sufferer, any property or valuable security, or of constraining the sufferer or any
person interested in such sufferer to do anything which is illegal or which may facilitate the commission
of an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for any purpose referred to in sub-section (1), shall be
punished with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
120. Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to extort confession, or to compel restoration of
property.—(1) Whoever voluntarily causes hurt for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer or from
any person interested in the sufferer, any confession or any information which may lead to the detection
of an offence or misconduct, or for the purpose of constraining the sufferer or any person interested in the
sufferer to restore or to cause the restoration of any property or valuable security or to satisfy any claim
or demand, or to give information which may lead to the restoration of any property or valuable security,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.