228. Fabricating false evidence.—Whoever causes any circumstance to exist or makes any false
entry in any book or record, or electronic record or makes any document or electronic record containing a
false statement, intending that such circumstance, false entry or false statement may appear in evidence in
a judicial proceeding, or in a proceeding taken by law before a public servant as such, or before an
arbitrator, and that such circumstance, false entry or false statement, so appearing in evidence, may cause
any person who in such proceeding is to form an opinion upon the evidence, to entertain an erroneous
opinion touching any point material to the result of such proceeding is said “to fabricate false evidence”.
Illustrations.
(a) A puts jewels into a box belonging to Z, with the intention that they may be found in that box, and
that this circumstance may cause Z to be convicted of theft. A has fabricated false evidence.
(b) A makes a false entry in his shop-book for the purpose of using it as corroborative evidence in a
Court. A has fabricated false evidence.
(c) A, with the intention of causing Z to be convicted of a criminal conspiracy, writes a letter in
imitation of Z’s handwriting, purporting to be addressed to an accomplice in such criminal conspiracy,
and puts the letter in a place which he knows that the officers of the police are likely to search. A has
fabricated false evidence.
229. Punishment for false evidence.—(1) Whoever intentionally gives false evidence in any stage
of a judicial proceeding, or fabricates false evidence for the purpose of being used in any stage of a
judicial proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever intentionally gives or fabricates false evidence in any case other than that referred to in
sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
Explanation 1.—A trial before a Court-martial is a judicial proceeding.
Explanation 2.—An investigation directed by law preliminary to a proceeding before a Court, is a
stage of a judicial proceeding, though that investigation may not take place before a Court.
Illustration.
A, in an enquiry before a Magistrate for the purpose of ascertaining whether Z ought to be committed
for trial, makes on oath a statement which he knows to be false. As this enquiry is a stage of a judicial
proceeding, A has given false evidence.
Explanation 3.—An investigation directed by a Court according to law, and conducted under the
authority of a Court, is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that investigation may not take place
before a Court.
74
Illustration.
A, in an enquiry before an officer deputed by a Court to ascertain on the spot the boundaries of land,
makes on oath a statement which he knows to be false. As this enquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding,
A has given false evidence.
230. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of capital offence.—
(1) Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that
he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an offence which is capital by the law for the time
being in force in India shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees.
(2) If an innocent person be convicted and executed in consequence of false evidence referred to in
sub-section (1), the person who gives such false evidence shall be punished either with death or the
punishment specified in sub-section (1).
231. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of offence punishable
with imprisonment for life or imprisonment.—Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence intending
thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an
offence which by the law for the time being in force in India is not capital, but punishable with
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term of seven years or upwards, shall be punished as a
person convicted of that offence would be liable to be punished.
Illustration.
A gives false evidence before a Court, intending thereby to cause Z to be convicted of a dacoity. The
punishment of dacoity is imprisonment for life, or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
ten years, with or without fine. A, therefore, is liable to imprisonment for life or imprisonment, with or
without fine.
232. Threatening any person to give false evidence.—(1) Whoever threatens another with any
injury to his person, reputation or property or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person
is interested, with intent to cause that person to give false evidence shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
(2) If innocent person is convicted and sentenced in consequence of false evidence referred to in
sub-section (1), with death or imprisonment for more than seven years, the person who threatens shall be
punished with the same punishment and sentence in the same manner and to the same extent such
innocent person is punished and sentenced.
233. Using evidence known to be false.—Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as true or
genuine evidence any evidence which he knows to be false or fabricated, shall be punished in the same
manner as if he gave or fabricated false evidence.
234. Issuing or signing false certificate.—Whoever issues or signs any certificate required by law to
be given or signed, or relating to any fact of which such certificate is by law admissible in evidence,
knowing or believing that such certificate is false in any material point, shall be punished in the same
manner as if he gave false evidence.
235. Using as true a certificate known to be false.—Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use any
such certificate as a true certificate, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished
in the same manner as if he gave false evidence.
236. False statement made in declaration which is by law receivable as evidence.—Whoever, in
any declaration made or subscribed by him, which declaration any Court or any public servant or other
person, is bound or authorised by law to receive as evidence of any fact, makes any statement which is
false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, touching any point
material to the object for which the declaration is made or used, shall be punished in the same manner as
if he gave false evidence.
75
237. Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false.—Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to
use as true any such declaration, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished in
the same manner as if he gave false evidence.
Explanation.—A declaration which is inadmissible merely upon the ground of some informality, is a
declaration within the meaning of section 236 and this section.
238. Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to screen
offender.—Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been committed, causes
any evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear, with the intention of screening the offender
from legal punishment, or with that intention gives any information respecting the offence which he
knows or believes to be false shall,—
(a) if the offence which he knows or believes to have been committed is punishable with death,
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and
shall also be liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for any term not extending to ten years, be
punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend
to one-fourth part of the longest term of the imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or
with both.
Illustration.
A, knowing that B has murdered Z, assists B to hide the body with the intention of screening B from
punishment. A is liable to imprisonment of either description for seven years, and also to fine.
239. Intentional omission to give information of offence by person bound to inform.—Whoever,
knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been committed, intentionally omits to give any
information respecting that offence which he is legally bound to give, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
240. Giving false information respecting an offence committed.—Whoever, knowing or having
reason to believe that an offence has been committed, gives any information respecting that offence
which he knows or believes to be false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—In sections 238 and 239 and in this section the word “offence” includes any act
committed at any place out of India, which, if committed in India, would be punishable under any of the
following sections, namely, 103, 105, 307, sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 309, sub-sections (2),
(3), (4) and (5) of section 310, 311, 312, clauses (f) and (g) of section 326, sub-sections (4), (6), (7) and
(8) of section 331, clauses (a) and (b) of section 332.
241. Destruction of document or electronic record to prevent its production as evidence.—
Whoever secretes or destroys any document or electronic record which he may be lawfully compelled to
produce as evidence in a Court or in any proceeding lawfully held before a public servant, as such, or
obliterates or renders illegible the whole or any part of such document or electronic record with the
intention of preventing the same from being produced or used as evidence before such Court or public
servant as aforesaid, or after he shall have been lawfully summoned or required to produce the same for
that purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
242. False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit or prosecution.—Whoever falsely
personates another, and in such assumed character makes any admission or statement, or confesses
judgment, or causes any process to be issued or becomes bail or security, or does any other act in any suit
76
or criminal prosecution, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
243. Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in
execution.—Whoever fraudulently removes, conceals, transfers or delivers to any person any property or
any interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein from being taken as a
forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced, or which he knows to
be likely to be pronounced, by a Court or other competent authority, or from being taken in execution of a
decree or order which has been made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a Court in a civil
suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
244. Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution.—Whoever
fraudulently accepts, receives or claims any property or any interest therein, knowing that he has no right
or rightful claim to such property or interest, or practises any deception touching any right to any
property or any interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein from being
taken as a forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced, or which he
knows to be likely to be pronounced by a Court or other competent authority, or from being taken in
execution of a decree or order which has been made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a
Court in a civil suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
245. Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due.—Whoever fraudulently causes or suffers a
decree or order to be passed against him at the suit of any person for a sum not due or for a larger sum
than is due to such person or for any property or interest in property to which such person is not entitled,
or fraudulently causes or suffers a decree or order to be executed against him after it has been satisfied, or
for anything in respect of which it has been satisfied, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustration.
A institutes a suit against Z. Z, knowing that A is likely to obtain a decree against him, fraudulently
suffers a judgment to pass against him for a larger amount at the suit of B, who has no just claim against
him, in order that B, either on his own account or for the benefit of Z, may share in the proceeds of any
sale of Z’s property which may be made under A’s decree. Z has committed an offence under this
section.
246. Dishonestly making false claim in Court.—Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with
intent to injure or annoy any person, makes in a Court any claim which he knows to be false, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall
also be liable to fine.
247. Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due.—Whoever fraudulently obtains a decree or
order against any person for a sum not due, or for a larger sum than is due or for any property or interest
in property to which he is not entitled, or fraudulently causes a decree or order to be executed against any
person after it has been satisfied or for anything in respect of which it has been satisfied, or fraudulently
suffers or permits any such act to be done in his name, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
248. False charge of offence made with intent to injure.—Whoever, with intent to cause injury to
any person, institutes or causes to be instituted any criminal proceeding against that person, or falsely
charges any person with having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for
such proceeding or charge against that person,—
(a) shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five
years, or with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees, or with both;
(b) if such criminal proceeding be instituted on a false charge of an offence punishable with
death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for ten years or upwards, shall be punishable with
77
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
249. Harbouring offender.—Whenever an offence has been committed, whoever harbours or
conceals a person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the offender, with the intention of
screening him from legal punishment shall,—
(a) if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, and not to ten
years, be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term which
may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or with
fine, or with both.
Explanation.— “Offence” in this section includes any act committed at any place out of India, which,
if committed in India, would be punishable under any of the following sections, namely, 103, 105, 307,
sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 309, sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 310, 311, 312,
clauses (f) and (g) of section 326, sub-sections (4), (6), (7) and (8) of section 331, clauses (a) and (b) of
section 332 and every such act shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be punishable as if the
accused person had been guilty of it in India.
Exception.—This section shall not extend to any case in which the harbour or concealment is by the
spouse of the offender.
Illustration.
A, knowing that B has committed dacoity, knowingly conceals B in order to screen him from legal
punishment. Here, as B is liable to imprisonment for life, A is liable to imprisonment of either description
for a term not exceeding three years, and is also liable to fine.
250. Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from punishment.—Whoever accepts or attempts to
obtain, or agrees to accept, any gratification for himself or any other person, or any restitution of property
to himself or any other person, in consideration of his concealing an offence or of his screening any
person from legal punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding against any person for the purpose
of bringing him to legal punishment shall,—
(a) if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending to ten years, be punished with
imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth
part of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
251. Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration of screening offender.—Whoever
gives or causes, or offers or agrees to give or cause, any gratification to any person, or restores or causes
the restoration of any property to any person, in consideration of that person’s concealing an offence, or
of his screening any person from legal punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding against any
person for the purpose of bringing him to legal punishment shall,—
(a) if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;
78
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending to ten years, be punished with
imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth
part of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.
Exception.—The provisions of this section and section 250 do not extend to any case in which the
offence may lawfully be compounded.
252. Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc.—Whoever takes or agrees or consents to
take any gratification under pretence or on account of helping any person to recover any movable
property of which he shall have been deprived by any offence punishable under this Sanhita, shall, unless
he uses all means in his power to cause the offender to be apprehended and convicted of the offence, be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine,
or with both.
253. Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or whose apprehension has been
ordered.—Whenever any person convicted of or charged with an offence, being in lawful custody for
that offence, escapes from such custody, or whenever a public servant, in the exercise of the lawful
powers of such public servant, orders a certain person to be apprehended for an offence, whoever,
knowing of such escape or order for apprehension, harbours or conceals that person with the intention of
preventing him from being apprehended, shall be punished in the manner following, namely:—
(a) if the offence for which the person was in custody or is ordered to be apprehended is
punishable with death, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(b) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for ten years, he shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, with
or without fine;
(c) if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year and not to ten
years, he shall be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term
which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of the imprisonment provided for such
offence, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—“Offence” in this section includes also any act or omission of which a person is
alleged to have been guilty out of India, which, if he had been guilty of it in India, would have been
punishable as an offence, and for which he is, under any law relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable to
be apprehended or detained in custody in India, and every such act or omission shall, for the purposes of
this section, be deemed to be punishable as if the accused person had been guilty of it in India.
Exception.—The provisions of this section do not extend to the case in which the harbour or
concealment is by the spouse of the person to be apprehended.
254. Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits.—Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe
that any persons are about to commit or have recently committed robbery or dacoity, harbours them or
any of them, with the intention of facilitating the commission of such robbery or dacoity, or of screening
them or any of them from punishment, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section it is immaterial whether the robbery or dacoity is
intended to be committed, or has been committed, within or without India.
Exception.—The provisions of this section do not extend to the case in which the harbour is by the
spouse of the offender.
255.—Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save person from punishment or
property from forfeiture.—Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the
law as to the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public servant, intending thereby to save, or
79
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby save, any person from legal punishment, or subject him to a
less punishment than that to which he is liable, or with intent to save, or knowing that he is likely thereby
to save, any property from forfeiture or any charge to which it is liable by law, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
256. Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with intent to save person from
punishment or property from forfeiture.—Whoever, being a public servant, and being as such public
servant, charged with the preparation of any record or other writing, frames that record or writing in a
manner which he knows to be incorrect, with intent to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby cause, loss or injury to the public or to any person, or with intent thereby to save, or knowing it to
be likely that he will thereby save, any person from legal punishment, or with intent to save, or knowing
that he is likely thereby to save, any property from forfeiture or other charge to which it is liable by law,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or
with fine, or with both.
257. Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making report, etc., contrary to law.—
Whoever, being a public servant, corruptly or maliciously makes or pronounces in any stage of a judicial
proceeding, any report, order, verdict, or decision which he knows to be contrary to law, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with
fine, or with both.
258. Commitment for trial or confinement by person having authority who knows that he is
acting contrary to law.—Whoever, being in any office which gives him legal authority to commit
persons for trial or to confinement, or to keep persons in confinement, corruptly or maliciously commits
any person for trial or to confinement, or keeps any person in confinement, in the exercise of that
authority knowing that in so doing he is acting contrary to law, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.
259. Intentional omission to apprehend on part of public servant bound to apprehend.—
Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as such public servant to apprehend or to keep in
confinement any person charged with or liable to be apprehended for an offence, intentionally omits to
apprehend such person, or intentionally suffers such person to escape, or intentionally aids such person in
escaping or attempting to escape from such confinement, shall be punished,—
(a) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, with or
without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged
with, or liable to be apprehended for, an offence punishable with death; or
(b) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, with or
without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged
with, or liable to be apprehended for, an offence punishable with imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years; or
(c) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, with or
without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged
with, or liable to be apprehended for, an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term less than
ten years.
260. Intentional omission to apprehend on part of public servant bound to apprehend person
under sentence or lawfully committed.—Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as such public
servant to apprehend or to keep in confinement any person under sentence of a Court for any offence or
lawfully committed to custody, intentionally omits to apprehend such person, or intentionally suffers such
person to escape or intentionally aids such person in escaping or attempting to escape from such
confinement, shall be punished,—
(a) with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to fourteen years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have
been apprehended, is under sentence of death; or
80
(b) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, with or
without fine, if the person in confinement or who ought to have been apprehended, is subject, by a
sentence of a Court, or by virtue of a commutation of such sentence, to imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term of ten years, or upwards; or
(c) with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both, if the person in confinement or who ought to have been apprehended, is subject by
a sentence of a Court to imprisonment for a term not extending to ten years or if the person was
lawfully committed to custody.
261. Escape from confinement or custody negligently suffered by public servant.—Whoever,
being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to keep in confinement any person charged
with or convicted of any offence or lawfully committed to custody, negligently suffers such person to
escape from confinement, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both.
262. Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful apprehension.—Whoever intentionally
offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of himself for any offence with
which he is charged or of which he has been convicted, or escapes or attempts to escape from any
custody in which he is lawfully detained for any such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—The punishment in this section is in addition to the punishment for which the person
to be apprehended or detained in custody was liable for the offence with which he was charged, or of
which he was convicted.
263. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension of another person.—Whoever,
intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of any other person for
an offence, or rescues or attempts to rescue any other person from any custody in which that person is
lawfully detained for an offence,—
(a) shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both; or
(b) if the person to be apprehended, or the person rescued or attempted to be rescued, is charged
with or liable to be apprehended for an offence punishable with imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; or
(c) if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is charged with or
liable to be apprehended for an offence punishable with death, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; or
(d) if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is liable under the
sentence of a Court or by virtue of a commutation of such a sentence, to imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for a term of ten years or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; or
(e) if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is under sentence of
death, shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment of either description for a term
not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
264. Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape, on part of public servant, in cases not
otherwise provided for.—Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to
apprehend, or to keep in confinement, any person in any case not provided for in section 259, section 260
or section 261, or in any other law for the time being in force, omits to apprehend that person or suffers
him to escape from confinement, shall be punished—
(a) if he does so intentionally, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and
81
(b) if he does so negligently, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.
265. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension or escape or rescue in cases not otherwise
provided for.—Whoever, in any case not provided for in section 262 or section 263 or in any other law
for the time being in force, intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful
apprehension of himself or of any other person, or escapes or attempts to escape from any custody in
which he is lawfully detained, or rescues or attempts to rescue any other person from any custody in
which that person is lawfully detained, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
266. Violation of condition of remission of punishment.—Whoever, having accepted any
conditional remission of punishment, knowingly violates any condition on which such remission was
granted, shall be punished with the punishment to which he was originally sentenced, if he has already
suffered no part of that punishment, and if he has suffered any part of that punishment, then with so much
of that punishment as he has not already suffered.
267. Intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting in judicial proceeding.—
Whoever, intentionally offers any insult, or causes any interruption to any public servant, while such
public servant is sitting in any stage of a judicial proceeding, shall be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or
with both.
268. Personation of assessor.—Whoever, by personation or otherwise, shall intentionally cause, or
knowingly suffer himself to be returned, empanelled or sworn as an assessor in any case in which he
knows that he is not entitled by law to be so returned, empanelled or sworn, or knowing himself to have
been so returned, empanelled or sworn contrary to law, shall voluntarily serve as such assessor, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine,
or with both.
269. Failure by person released on bail bond or bond to appear in Court.—Whoever, having
been charged with an offence and released on bail bond or on bond, fails without sufficient cause (the
burden of proving which shall lie upon him), to appear in Court in accordance with the terms of the bail
or bond, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine, or with both.
Explanation.—The punishment under this section is—
(a) in addition to the punishment to which the offender would be liable on a conviction for the
offence with which he has been charged; and
(b) without prejudice to the power of the Court to order forfeiture of the bond.
CHAPTER XV
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, DECENCY AND MORALS
270. Public nuisance.—A person is guilty of a public nuisance who does any act or is guilty of an
illegal omission which causes any common injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the people in
general who dwell or occupy property in the vicinity, or which must necessarily cause injury, obstruction,
danger or annoyance to persons who may have occasion to use any public right but a common nuisance is
not excused on the ground that it causes some convenience or advantage.
271. Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life.—Whoever unlawfully or
negligently does any act which is, and which he knows or has reason to believe to be, likely to spread the
infection of any disease dangerous to life, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
272. Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life.—Whoever malignantly
does any act which is, and which he knows or has reason to believe to be, likely to spread the infection of
82
any disease dangerous to life, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
273. Disobedience to quarantine rule.—Whoever knowingly disobeys any rule made by the
Government for putting any mode of transport into a state of quarantine, or for regulating the intercourse
of any such transport in a state of quarantine or for regulating the intercourse between places where an
infectious disease prevails and other places, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
274. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale.—Whoever adulterates any article of food or
drink, so as to make such article noxious as food or drink, intending to sell such article as food or drink,
or knowing it to be likely that the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
275. Sale of noxious food or drink.—Whoever sells, or offers or exposes for sale, as food or drink,
any article which has been rendered or has become noxious, or is in a state unfit for food or drink,
knowing or having reason to believe that the same is noxious as food or drink, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
276. Adulteration of drugs.—Whoever adulterates any drug or medical preparation in such a
manner as to lessen the efficacy or change the operation of such drug or medical preparation, or to make
it noxious, intending that it shall be sold or used for, or knowing it to be likely that it will be sold or used
for, any medicinal purpose, as if it had not undergone such adulteration, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
277. Sale of adulterated drugs.—Whoever, knowing any drug or medical preparation to have been
adulterated in such a manner as to lessen its efficacy, to change its operation, or to render it noxious, sells
the same, or offers or exposes it for sale, or issues it from any dispensary for medicinal purposes as
unadulterated, or causes it to be used for medicinal purposes by any person not knowing of the
adulteration, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
278. Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation.—Whoever knowingly sells, or offers or
exposes for sale, or issues from a dispensary for medicinal purposes, any drug or medical preparation, as
a different drug or medical preparation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with
both.
279. Fouling water of public spring or reservoir.—Whoever voluntarily corrupts or fouls the water
of any public spring or reservoir, so as to render it less fit for the purpose for which it is ordinarily used,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
280. Making atmosphere noxious to health.—Whoever voluntarily vitiates the atmosphere in any
place so as to make it noxious to the health of persons in general dwelling or carrying on business in the
neighbourhood or passing along a public way, shall be punished with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees.
281. Rash driving or riding on a public way.—Whoever drives any vehicle, or rides, on any public
way in a manner so rash or negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to
any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
282. Rash navigation of vessel.—Whoever navigates any vessel in a manner so rash or negligent as
to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
83
283. Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy.—Whoever exhibits any false light, mark or buoy,
intending or knowing it to be likely that such exhibition will mislead any navigator, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and with fine which
shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.
284. Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded vessel.—Whoever knowingly or
negligently conveys, or causes to be conveyed for hire, any person by water in any vessel, when that
vessel is in such a state or so loaded as to endanger the life of that person, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
285. Danger or obstruction in public way or line of navigation.—Whoever, by doing any act, or
by omitting to take order with any property in his possession or under his charge, causes danger,
obstruction or injury to any person in any public way or public line of navigation, shall be punished with
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
286. Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance.—Whoever does, with any poisonous
substance, any act in a manner so rash or negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt
or injury to any person or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any poisonous
substance in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from such
poisonous substance, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
287. Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter.—Whoever does, with fire or
any combustible matter, any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or to be likely to
cause hurt or injury to any other person or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any fire
or any combustible matter in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to
human life from such fire or combustible matter, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees, or with both.
288. Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance.—Whoever does, with any explosive
substance, any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or
injury to any other person, or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any explosive
substance in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from that
substance, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
289. Negligent conduct with respect to machinery.—Whoever does, with any machinery, any act
so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other
person or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any machinery in his possession or
under his care as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from such machinery,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
290. Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down, repairing or constructing buildings, etc.—
Whoever, in pulling down, repairing or constructing any building, knowingly or negligently omits to take
such measures with that building as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from
the fall of that building, or of any part thereof, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or
with both.
291. Negligent conduct with respect to animal.—Whoever knowingly or negligently omits to take
such measures with any animal in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to
human life, or any probable danger of grievous hurt from such animal, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
84
292. Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise provided for.—Whoever commits a
public nuisance in any case not otherwise punishable by this Sanhita shall be punished with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees.
293. Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue.—Whoever repeats or continues a
public nuisance, having been enjoined by any public servant who has lawful authority to issue such
injunction not to repeat or continue such nuisance, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both.
294. Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc.—(1) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a book, pamphlet,
paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation, figure or any other object, including display of any
content in electronic form shall be deemed to be obscene if it is lascivious or appeals to the prurient
interest or if its effect, or (where it comprises two or more distinct items) the effect of any one of its
items, is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons who are likely, having regard
to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter contained or embodied in it.
(2) Whoever—
(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits or in any manner puts into circulation, or for
purposes of sale, hire, distribution, public exhibition or circulation, makes, produces or has in his
possession any obscene book, pamphlet, paper, drawing, painting, representation or figure or any
other obscene object whatsoever in whatever manner; or
(b) imports, exports or conveys any obscene object for any of the purposes aforesaid, or knowing
or having reason to believe that such object will be sold, let to hire, distributed or publicly exhibited
or in any manner put into circulation; or
(c) takes part in or receives profits from any business in the course of which he knows or has
reason to believe that any such obscene objects are, for any of the purposes aforesaid, made
produced, purchased, kept, imported, exported, conveyed, publicly exhibited or in any manner put
into circulation; or
(d) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that any person is engaged or is ready
to engage in any act which is an offence under this section, or that any such obscene object can be
procured from or through any person; or
(e) offers or attempts to do any act which is an offence under this section,
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, and, in the event of a
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
five years, and also with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
Exception.—This section does not extend to—
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation or figure—
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public good on the ground
that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation or figure is in the interest
of science, literature, art or learning or other objects of general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious purposes;
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise represented on or in—
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24 of 1958); or
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the conveyance of idols, or kept or used for any religious
purpose.
295. Sale, etc., of obscene objects to child.—Whoever sells, lets to hire, distributes, exhibits or
circulates to any child any such obscene object as is referred to in section 294, or offers or attempts so to
85
do, shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, and, in the event of a
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and also with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
296. Obscene acts and songs.—Whoever, to the annoyance of others,—
(a) does any obscene act in any public place; or
(b) sings, recites or utters any obscene song, ballad or words, in or near any public place,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months,
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
297. Keeping lottery office.—(1) Whoever keeps any office or place for the purpose of drawing any
lottery not being a State lottery or a lottery authorised by the State Government, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(2) Whoever publishes any proposal to pay any sum, or to deliver any goods, or to do or forbear from
doing anything for the benefit of any person, on any event or contingency relative or applicable to the
drawing of any ticket, lot, number or figure in any such lottery, shall be punished with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees.
CHAPTER XVI
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION
298. Injuring or defiling place of worship with intent to insult religion of any class.—Whoever
destroys, damages or defiles any place of worship, or any object held sacred by any class of persons with
the intention of thereby insulting the religion of any class of persons or with the knowledge that any class
of persons is likely to consider such destruction, damage or defilement as an insult to their religion, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
299. Deliberate and malicious acts, intended to outrage religious feelings of any class by
insulting its religion or religious beliefs.—Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of
outraging the religious feelings of any class of citizens of India, by words, either spoken or written, or by
signs or by visible representations or through electronic means or otherwise, insults or attempts to insult
the religion or the religious beliefs of that class, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
300. Disturbing religious assembly.—Whoever voluntarily causes disturbance to any assembly
lawfully engaged in the performance of religious worship, or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
301. Trespassing on burial places, etc.—Whoever, with the intention of wounding the feelings of
any person, or of insulting the religion of any person, or with the knowledge that the feelings of any
person are likely to be wounded, or that the religion of any person is likely to be insulted thereby,
commits any trespass in any place of worship or on any place of sepulchre, or any place set apart for the
performance of funeral rites or as a depository for the remains of the dead, or offers any indignity to any
human corpse, or causes disturbance to any persons assembled for the performance of funeral
ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both.